A Machine Learning Potential for Hexagonal
Boron Nitride Applied to Thermally and
Mechanically Induced Rippling
Fabian L. Thiemann,†,‡ Patrick Rowe,† Erich A. Müller,‡ and Angelos
Michaelides∗,†
†Thomas Young Centre, London Centre for Nanotechnology, and Department of Physics
and Astronomy, University College London, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, United
Kingdom
‡Department of Chemical Engineering, Imperial College London, South Kensington
Campus, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom
E-mail: angelos.michaelides@ucl.ac.uk
Abstract
We introduce an interatomic potential for
hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) based on the
Gaussian approximation potential (GAP) ma-
chine learning methodology. The potential is
based on a training set of configurations col-
lected from density functional theory (DFT)
simulations and is capable of treating bulk and
multilayer hBN as well as nanotubes of arbi-
trary chirality. The developed force field faith-
fully reproduces the potential energy surface
predicted by DFT while improving the effi-
ciency by several orders of magnitude. We test
our potential by comparing formation energies,
geometrical properties, phonon dispersion spec-
tra and mechanical properties with respect to
benchmark DFT calculations and experiments.
In addition, we use our model and a recently de-
veloped graphene-GAP to analyse and compare
thermally and mechanically induced rippling
in large scale two-dimensional (2D) hBN and
graphene. Both materials show almost identi-
cal scaling behaviour for the height fluctuations
indicating the possibility of a generally applica-
ble scaling exponent of η ≈ 0.85 for 2D ma-
terials. Based on its lower resistance to bend-
ing, however, hBN experiences slightly larger
out-of-plane deviations both at zero and finite
applied external strain. Upon compression a
phase transition from incoherent ripple motion
to soliton-ripples is observed for both materi-
als. Our potential is freely available online at
[http://www.libatoms.org].
Introduction
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), though less
well-known than its isostructural analogue,
graphene, is no less fascinating from the per-
spective of its properties and potential appli-
cations. The insulating character,1 resistance
to oxidation,2 high thermal conductivity,3 and
mechanical strength4 of hBN have been ex-
ploited in various fields ranging from electronic
devices,5,6 water purification,7 and industrial
chemistry8–11 to biomedical science and engi-
neering.12–14 Yet, certain aspects of the be-
haviour of low-dimensional hBN remain to be
rationalised and explored further. For instance,
the origin of experimentally observed differ-
ences in friction15 and surface charge16,17 be-
tween graphene and hBN surfaces in contact
with water requires a deeper understanding on
the microscopic level18 to exploit the full po-
tential of hBN for desalination processes and
1
ar
X
iv
:2
00
7.
11
44
8v
1 
 [
co
nd
-m
at
.m
tr
l-
sc
i]
  2
2 
Ju
l 
20
20
angelos.michaelides@ucl.ac.uk
http://www.libatoms.org
osmotic power generation.19 Similarly, the im-
pact of intrinsic ripples on layered hBN has not
received as much attention as for graphene,20,21
where these out-of-plane deviations have a sig-
nificant impact on properties such as graphene’s
bandgap22–24 or reactivity.25 Assuming analo-
gous behaviour for two-dimensional (2D) hBN
the ability to predict, and potentially adjust
the ripple texture through strain would be of
value to future applications.26
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations offer
a computational approach to gain insight into
nanoscale properties of materials. A faithful
representation of the potential energy surface
(PES) is a crucial requirement for reliable sim-
ulations, in particular an accurate description
of the phonon dispersion spectrum which deter-
mines a variety of mechanical and thermody-
namic properties as well as diffusion processes
across low-dimensional materials. Due to the
strong coupling between the adsorbate’s mo-
tion and the phonon modes of the solid,27–30
potential inaccuracies in the predicted lattice
vibrations are directly propagated to dynamical
and interfacial properties. Various force fields
for hBN are available, including Tersoff-type
potentials,31–41 reactive force fields,42–46 and
potentials fitted to density functional theory
(DFT).47 Despite the valuable and excellent
work on thermal and mechanical properties of
hBN allotropes48–51 based on these established
models and notwithstanding their computa-
tional efficiency, none of them predicts the vi-
brational properties in good agreement with
experiments as we learned in the course of this
work. Thus, these models cannot be expected
to give reliable results for our systems of inter-
est.
Incorporating electronic structure based
methods and performing ab initio molecular
dynamics (AIMD) represents an alternative ap-
proach which often offers a significantly more
accurate description of the PES and the phonon
dispersion spectrum. DFT driven AIMD has
been employed to study hBN in various con-
texts including proton transfer through a hBN
sheet,52 interfacial behaviour with water,53 and
the impact of strain on the vibrational prop-
erties of single and multiple layers of hBN.54
These methods, however, come with a high
computational cost that severely restricts the
accessible system sizes and time scales. Finite-
size effects remain a practical issue of AIMD
simulations and can compromise the reliability
of calculated transport properties for confined
fluids.55 This is also true for ripples where the
amplitude of the out-of-plane deviations is par-
tially determined by the dimensions of the 2D
layer.21,56
The rise of machine learning (ML) method-
ologies and their fruitful application in the
development of interatomic potentials has pro-
vided a pathway for achieving an accuracy close
to that of their ab initio reference while lower-
ing the computational costs by several orders
of magnitude.57–60 These potentials are based
on a transformation of atomic coordinates us-
ing high dimensional descriptors58 which serve
as input for the ML algorithm to establish a
structure-energy mapping. In order to actually
“learn” this relationship, a large database of
configurations and related ab initio energies
and forces is required. In recent years, many
ML-based potentials have been developed for
a significant number of materials spanning a
variety of algorithms including Gaussian kernel
regression, artificial neural networks and per-
mutationally invariant polynomials.61–65 A ma-
chine learning potential based on the Gaussian
Approximation Potential (GAP)62,66 frame-
work was recently presented by some of us
for hBN’s isostructural analogue, graphene.67
This model achieves a very good agreement
with experiments throughout a large range of
properties including the thermal expansion and
phonon dispersion spectrum. GAP models also
have been proposed to study amorphous and
crystalline carbon,68,69 tungsten,70 silicon,62 as
well as hybrid perovskites.71
In this work we introduce a GAP for hBN
which is able to treat the bulk phase, isolated
and multilayered sheets of hBN, as well as nan-
otubes of arbitrary chirality. We evaluate the
performance of our model by comparing against
2
DFT as well as frequently applied force fields
for a variety of properties. In particular, signif-
icant improvements for the phonon spectra are
obtained with the hBN-GAP compared to es-
tablished force fields. We, then, perform large-
scale MD simulations using our new potential
and the recently published graphene-GAP67
to investigate the behaviour of thermally and
mechanically induced rippling in 2D hBN and
graphene. We find an almost identical scaling
exponent for both materials, while the am-
plitude and shape of the height fluctuations
depends on the material’s properties as well as
on the applied strain. Looking forward, the
hBN-GAP will be particularly valuable where
an accurate description of the system’s vibra-
tions and dynamics is required. This includes
quantitative studies on diffusion of adsorbates
across layered hBN or through hBN nanotubes.
The remainder of this paper is structured as
follows. Next, we give a brief overview of the
GAP methodology as well as a detailed expla-
nation of technical aspects which are crucial to
consider in the construction of a ML potential.
This is followed by a detailed validation of the
accuracy of the hBN-GAP. The results of the
rippling analysis are reported before we draw
the conclusions of this study.
Construction of the hBN-
GAP
A detailed derivation of the theory behind the
GAP framework is available elsewhere.62,66–68,70
For completeness, we will an abridged explana-
tion and focus on the practical issues within
the construction. GAP mimics the Born-
Oppenheimer PES without treating electrons
explicitly by establishing a link between struc-
ture and energy based on a transformation of
the atomic positions into local environments
using so-called descriptors.62 To this end, the
target PES is represented by a large database of
ab initio energies which is then interpolated by
using Gaussian kernel regression (GKR). The
decomposition into local contributions is an
approximation inherent to all interatomic po-
tentials and can vary from atom-pair distances
to complex many-body (MB) descriptors.58
Independent of their dimensionality, however,
descriptors are generally required to be trans-
lationally, rotationally, and permutationally
invariant to guarantee a one to one mapping of
energy to configuration.72
In this work, the PES of hBN is described
by a sum of two-body (2B) terms and the high
dimensional smooth overlap of atomic positions
(SOAP)73 MB descriptor. Within SOAP, each
atomic environment is represented by a local
neighbour density generated by summing over
Gaussians placed on all atoms within a certain
cut-off. This density is expanded in a basis
set of radial functions and spherical harmon-
ics wherein the related coefficients form the
so-called SOAP vectors. The product of two
independent SOAP vectors represents the sim-
ilarity between the related local environments,
which can be easily made invariant to rotations.
This so-called SOAP kernel is constructed for
a certain set of training environments and the
corresponding weight of their local contribu-
tion to the total energy of the global configu-
rations is determined within the GKR fitting
procedure. In addition to the energies, we also
train on the atomic forces and virial stresses. A
deeper insight and detailed derivation of the ex-
tension to use partial derivatives can be found
elsewhere.66
Clearly, an accurate description of the PES is
critically dependent on a comprehensive train-
ing set comprised of configurations of the de-
sired phase space region. Here, this covers pe-
riodic and defect-free sheets and nanotubes of
arbitrary chiralities. We generated a structural
database containing more than 22,000 config-
urations. While most of them were extracted
from AIMD trajectories, others originated from
trajectories obtained with earlier GAP ver-
sions or were based on distinct displacements
of atoms to capture particular properties. The
number of atoms was limited to 200 and dif-
ferent thermodynamic conditions were sampled
varying the temperature between 30 and 3000
K as well as applying uniaxial strain of up to
3
5 % to layered hBN. Based on this variety of
structures, we also expect an accurate interpo-
lation to strained nanotubes.
For each configuration, we conducted tightly
converged DFT calculations to obtain the to-
tal energy, atomic forces, and virial stresses
on which the GAP model was then trained.
For all configurations we used the VASP plane-
wave DFT code,74–77 with the optB86b-vdW
non-local dispersion exchange-correlation func-
tional,78 an energy cut-off of 700 eV, a Gaus-
sian smearing of 0.05 eV, and projector aug-
mented wave pseudopotentials.79,80 We chose
the optB86b-vdW functional based on its per-
ceived accuracy for vdW bonded systems.81,82
A comparison to other functionals is included in
the supplementary information. The reciprocal
lattice was sampled in periodic directions with
a maximum distance between the k -points of
0.02 Å−1 whereby the grid was either centered
at the zone centre in case of hexagonal cells or
Monkhorst-Pack based for orthorombic cells.
For ionic and cell relaxations, cell shape and
atomic positions were optimised independently
until all forces were below 10−3 eV Å
−1
and the
total energy was converged to less than 10−6
eV. These settings were consistently used in
this work if not stated otherwise.
In practice, it is not desirable to use the entire
structural database ( ≈ 22, 000 configurations)
as training set due to the redundant informa-
tion and the related increase of computational
costs. Here a subset of ≈ 2000 structures was
used. These were selected through a combina-
tion of farthest point sampling59,72 and manual
structure selection.
In order to obtain a qualitative overview of
the complexity of problem we are attempting
to fit, we performed a dimensionality reduction
using sketch-map83,84 to visualise our struc-
tural database in two dimensional space. The
resulting sketch-map, shown in figure 1, clusters
configurations based on their global similarity.
Similar structures are located closely together
while points with a high covariance are sepa-
rated further apart. The clustering indicates
the heterogeneity of the phase space region and
provides useful information on the capabili-
ties of the SOAP descriptor. For example, the
sketch-map highlights the anticipated similarity
between monolayers (Fig. 1D) and nanotubes
with large diameter (Fig. 1C) while less sta-
ble thermally deformed nanotubes with high
curvature are represented as an isolated island
(Fig. 1B). Single layer and bulk hBN (Fig. 1G)
are separated most far apart given the change
of environment induced by the adjacent lay-
ers. This dissimilarity distance is bridged by
bulk configurations with large interlayer spac-
ing, strong thermal fluctuations (Fig. 1F) and
bilayers (Fig. 1E). Interestingly, compressed bi-
layers (Fig. 1A) are singled out from the large
clusters as well as sheared bulk configurations
(Fig. 1H).
Having selected the training configurations,
an appropriate choice of certain model parame-
ters has to be made. Here, we will only discuss
those parameters to which the model is most
sensitive while a full overview is contained in
table 1 and a more detailed explanation can
be found elsewhere.66,70 Intuitively, cut-off and
basis-set expansion of the SOAP vector have
a high impact on the performance of the po-
tential. We chose to truncate the spherical
harmonic expansion after the eighth order, i.e.
l = 8 and n = 8, and set the SOAP cut-off
to 4.5 Å which has been proven to be suffi-
cient to reproduce the binding energy curve of
graphite.69 However, this cut-off for the SOAP
descriptor is too short to reproduce the in-
terlayer interaction curve between hBN layers
which does not tail off to zero until roughly
10 Å. Thus, we followed the procedure re-
cently introduced69 to fit a 2B-based model to
the interaction curve using a cut-off of 10 Å.
The predicted energy and forces were then sub-
tracted during the actual fit where we used a
shorter 2B descriptor with the same cut-off as
SOAP.
In practice, rather than using all local en-
vironments of the training set, the covariance
matrix is constructed based on M uncorrelated
sparse points.70 Here, we chose 50 points for the
4
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Figure 1: Sketch-map representation of the structural database generated for this work. Each
point corresponds to one atomic configuration for which the local SOAP vectors are averaged and
the SOAP kernel measures the global similarity between the structures. Short distances between
points represent higher similarity while points far apart from each other express a strong structural
deviation. The points are coloured according to their respective energy per atom calculated with
DFT. Periodic images in z-direction are blurred to visualise bulk structures. (A) Compressed
bilayer at 0 K (interlayer spacing ≈ 2.5 Å); (B) Nanotube (4,0) at 1000 K; (C) Nanotube (10,0)
at 300 K; (D) Monolayer at 30 K;(E) Bilayer at 3000 K; (F) Bulk at 3000 K; (G) Bulk at 300 K;
(H) Compressed bulk at 700 K.
2B descriptor and 5000 for SOAP. The number
of sparse points needed depends on the com-
plexity of the target phase space region the
model is fitted to. Given the focus on the
defect-free hexagonal phase of BN, the selected
number of sparse points for SOAP is in line with
recent work.69 Besides these descriptor related
parameters, the desirable target deviation, σ,
of the fit to the target properties is a critical
ingredient for an accurate model. While values
which are too large result in poor agreement
with the DFT reference per se, too small a cho-
sen value can lead to overfitting depriving the
GKR of its interpolation capability. Here, we
used configuration-specific tolerances in order
to distinguish between competing phases. For
example, the PES of bulk hBN is very shallow
close to the equilibrium resulting in energy dif-
ferences of distorted cells of less than 1 meV.
Thus, the tolerance was adapted for this kind
of system while for high energy configurations
larger values were set.
5
Table 1: Model parameters of the hBN-
GAP. Different target deviations (σ) were
used depending on the configuration.
Here, we only list the default values
which are applicable to most of the struc-
tures in our training set.
2b Descriptor
Cut-off (Å) 4.5
Cut-off width (Å) 0.5
δ 0.5
Sparse method Uniform
Sparse points 50
SOAP Descriptor
Cut-off (Å) 4.5
Cut-off width (Å) 0.5
δ 0.1
Sparse method CUR
Sparse points 5000
lmax 8
nmax 8
ζ 2
Target Deviations
σenergy 0.001
σforce 0.01
σvirial 0.05
Validation of the GAP
model
We validate the hBN-GAP and benchmark
its predictive capabilities against its DFT ref-
erence, comparing it to other frequently used
force fields, specifically the Tersoff potential31,32
parametrised by Sevik et al.,39 the extended
Tersoff potential (ExTeP) employing a modified
bond-order parameter,41 and the ReaxFF42,43
parametrised by Weismiller et al.44 In addition
to the standard versions, we also evaluated the
predictions made by both Tersoff and ExTeP
when combined with the recently developed
interlayer potential (ILP).85–87 This coupling
enables these models to account for the in-
termolecular interactions between hBN sheets.
These are typically neglected by the indepen-
dent bond-order potentials due to a cut-off of
2.0 Å which is below the equilibrium separation
between layers in bulk hBN of about 3.3 Å. The
list of force field models tested is by no means
exhaustive and is merely meant to serve as
baseline for our newly developed model in the
context of previous work. We also note that all
DFT comparisons employ the very same func-
tional, optB86b-vdW, and electronic structure
setup as applied in generation of training data.
While this is essential to appropriately evalu-
ate the quality of the constructed hBN-GAP,
it might distort the benchmarking by implying
that established force fields are in error when
deviating from DFT results based on our chosen
functional. To go some way to address this bias,
we compared the performance of different func-
tionals – local density approximation (LDA)
and other generalised gradient approximations
(GGA) – for basic crystalline properties of hBN
(see supplementary information for details).
The most intuitive measure to evaluate the
performance of a ML potential is through force
and energy errors on a basis of a validation set
of configurations. This analysis has been car-
ried out for most existing GAP models describ-
ing a great variety of materials.62,67,68 Force
correlation plots as well as a comparison of
computational costs for DFT, GAP, and the
established models can be found in the sup-
plementary information. Here, we will only
report the root mean square errors (RMSE)
with respect to DFT for the different models.
For a validation set of 1450 randomly picked
structures the hBN-GAP achieves a RMSE of
0.07 eV/Å. The established potentials are one
order of magnitude less accurate with Tersoff,
ExTeP, and ReaxFF yielding RMSEs of 1.09,
1.18, and 6.15 eV/Å, respectively. The ILP ex-
tended bond-order potentials perform surpris-
ingly slightly worse with 1.10 and 1.20 eV/Å
for Tersoff+ILP and ExTeP+ILP, respectively.
While a correct reproduction of the atomic
forces is a crucial requirement for any accurate
interatomic potential, it is, however, not a suffi-
cient criterion to secure an accurate description
of the system of interest. In the course of this
work, we observed that previously developed
versions of our potential showed similar force
6
Table 2: Comparison of lattice parameters and interlayer distances for the different
hBN phases between DFT (optB86b-vdW), the hBN-GAP, and other force fields. The
lattice parameters are given in absolute values while the relative error with respect
to DFT is given in percentage in brackets. For bulk hBN the out-of-plane lattice
parameter c corresponds to the length of the respective lattice vector while for an
isolated bilayer c̃ is defined as the interlayer distance. Due to the short cut-off of
Tersoff and ExTeP no values (–) are given for the out-of-plane lengths of bilayer and
bulk hBN.
Lattice Parameter [Å] (% Error)
DFT GAP Tersoff Tersoff + ILP ExTeP ExTeP + ILP ReaxFF
Bulk hBN (a) 2.51 2.51 (0.0) 2.50 (0.4) 2.50 (0.4) 2.50 (0.4) 2.50 (0.4) 2.55 (1.6)
Bulk hBN (c) 6.51 6.50 (0.1) – 6.46 (0.8) – 6.45 (0.9) 5.88 (9.7)
Bilayer (a) 2.51 2.51 (0.0) 2.50 (0.4) 2.50 (0.4) 2.50 (0.4) 2.50 (0.4) 2.55 (1.6)
Bilayer (c̃) 3.28 3.34 (1.8) – 3.26 (0.6) – 3.26 (0.6) 2.99 (8.8)
Monolayer (a) 2.51 2.51 (0.0) 2.50 (0.4) 2.50 (0.4) 2.50 (0.4) 2.50 (0.4) 2.55 (1.6)
Nanotube (10,0) 4.34 4.34 (0.0) 4.32 (0.5) 4.32 (0.5) 4.32 (0.5) 4.32 (0.5) 4.34 (0.0)
Nanotube (10,10) 2.51 2.51 (0.0) 2.50 (0.4) 2.50 (0.4) 2.51 (0.0) 2.50 (0.4) 2.55 (1.6)
errors but diverged significantly when compar-
ing material properties. Therefore, the valida-
tion presented will be focused on how the GAP
model performs for energetic, geometrical, me-
chanical, and vibrational properties of different
hBN phases.
The reproduction of lattice parameters for
different phases is an essential requirement an
accurate potential must fulfil. A comprehensive
comparison of lattice parameters predicted by
the hBN-GAP and other force fields as well as
the relative deviation from DFT can be found
in table 2. The DFT results agree well with
experimental results88 for the bulk phase al-
though the out-of-plane lattice parameter is
underestimated by 0.15 Å. Overall, our model
performs very well with respect to its DFT
reference showing the lowest relative error for
almost all lattice lengths and structures. The
only exception is the interlayer spacing of a
hBN bilayer revealing a relative deviation from
DFT of 1.8 %. As found for the general carbon
GAP and graphite, it is rather difficult to cor-
rectly describe the shallow energy minimum of
the interlayer binding curve.69 On the whole,
however, the performance of the hBN-GAP is
satisfactory with an average error of 0.27 %.
The established force fields considered also
achieve a very good performance for the geo-
metric properties albeit being slightly less ac-
curate than our hBN-GAP. Tersoff and ExTeP
yield average errors of 0.42 % and 0.34 %, re-
spectively, although their actual score is some-
what biased as no out-of-plane lengths were
considered. Coupling both potentials tuned
with ILP, however, allows for the description
of multilayered hBN and they both yield an
average error of 0.46 % comparable with the
hBN-GAP. Despite the better agreement for the
interlayer distance between two isolated sheets,
it should be noted that none of the existing po-
tentials is able to capture the qualitative trend
of an increased distance with respect to bulk
hBN. ReaxFF achieves a sufficient accuracy for
the in-plane and nanotubes lattice parameters
but it fails dramatically to capture the out-of-
plane lengths resulting in an overall error of
3.56 %.
In addition to the structural characteristics,
we now consider the energetics of the relevant
phases as shown in figure 2. To this end, the
computed formation energies of the optimised
structures are given per atom and relative to
7
bulk hBN which is the thermodynamically most
stable phase. In the case of layered hBN, the
observations from the lattice parameters for
Tersoff and ExTEP are confirmed. Due to
the lack of non-bonded contributions to the
energy these potentials cannot distinguish be-
tween different numbers of sheets yielding an
RMSE of more than 58 meV/atom for both
models. Compensating for this with the ILP,
the tuned Tersoff and ExTeP potentials achieve
good agreement with DFT with an improved
RMSE of 11 and 27 meV/atom, respectively.
While the performance of ReaxFF is mediocre
with an error of 45 meV/atom, our hBN-GAP
achieves an excellent agreement with DFT with
a RMSE < 1 meV/atom. This high accuracy is
persistent throughout the tested configurations
including the energetically less favourable nan-
otubes irrespective of diameter or chirality. To
avoid confusion it is worth mentioning that the
total energy of the nanotubes predicted by Ter-
soff and ExTeP is identical to those predicted
by their versions enhanced by ILP. The energy
shift in the plot is caused by the change of the
energy for the reference bulk hBN.
Part of the attention garnered by hBN is due
to its excellent mechanical properties. More-
over, a system’s response to mechanical com-
pression and tension is an essential property
for 2D materials as it affects the shape of rip-
ples in atomically thin sheets.21,89 In order to
ensure an accurate description of the strain-
deformation relationship we computed the rel-
evant elastic constants of bulk hBN with DFT,
GAP, and existing potentials. An overview
of these results and a comparison to experi-
mental measurements90 can be found in table
3. In order to determine the elastic constants,
finite distortions were made to the optimised
cell and the ions were allowed to relax. The
respective constants were then calculated from
the stress-strain relationship whereby different
magnitudes of strain were applied to guaran-
tee a linear behaviour. For ReaxFF this linear
relationship could not be achieved. Instead
physically unrealistic and negative elastic con-
stants were obtained. This indicates that the
parametrisation of the ReaxFF used44 does not
Figure 2: Formation energies of the hBN
configurations computed with DFT (optB86b-
vdW), the hBN-GAP, and other established
force fields. Both bond-order potentials Ter-
soff and ExTeP are shown with and without
the correction for multiple layers contributed
by the ILP. All energies are plotted relative to
bulk hBN. The lines are a guide to the eye.
yield a satisfactory description of the equilib-
rium shape of bulk hBN, namely AA′ stacking
in a hexagonal unit cell. This issue could not
be solved by changing to a different parameter
set46 for ReaxFF. The results for ReaxFF are,
thus, not included in table 3.
As the elastic constants are quite sensitive
to the basis set of the DFT calculations, the
plane wave cut-off was increased to 1000 eV to
converge results for the mechanical properties.
Our DFT calculations match the measurements
for most constants within the experimental un-
certainty. Both approaches predict that there
is no coupling between in-plane stress (strain)
and out-of-plane strain (stress), i.e. C13 = 0.
Our hBN-GAP achieves a very good agreement
with its reference DFT, particularly for the in-
plane constants C11, C12 and the out-of-plane
8
Table 3: Mechanical properties of bulk hBN calculated with DFT (optB86b-vdW), the
hBN-GAP, and other force fields in comparison to experimental measurements.90 For
the experiments the values in parenthesis correspond to the experimental uncertainty.
Due to the short cut-off of Tersoff and ExTeP no values (–) are given for the out-of-
plane elastic constants C13, C33, C44, and the bulk modulus.
Elastic constants [GPa]
DFT GAP Tersoff Tersoff + ILP ExTeP ExTeP + ILP Experiment90
C11 884.0 860.0 969.9 858.0 849.1 861.9 811.0 (12.0)
C12 202.2 191.9 303.0 269.8 152.4 156.3 169.0 (24.0)
C13 0.0 7.1 – 2.8 – 2.8 0.0 (3.0)
C33 33.8 33.5 – 37.9 – 37.7 27.0 (5.0)
C44 3.1 19.5 – 6.5 – 6.5 7.7 (5.0)
B (eq) 31.6 32.6 – 35.9 – 35.4
25.6 (8.0)
B (MEoS) 38.3 39.3 – 39.8 – 39.7
coupling C33 which also corresponds to a high
accuracy of the interlayer binding curve.82 The
prediction for C13 and C44 is slightly less accu-
rate while the actual behaviour is still captured
qualitatively. Beyond the individual couplings
between different directions, a correct descrip-
tion of the overall compressibility of the mate-
rial, i.e. the bulk modulus B, is desirable. Here,
we calculate B via a relationship91 dependent
on the elastic constants,
B =
C33(C11 + C12)− 2(C13)2
C11 + C12 + 2C33 − 4C12
, (1)
and by fitting the Murnaghan equation of state
(MEoS)92 to the energy-volume curve. For
the latter approach, the anisotropic character
of hBN requires a non-isotropic compression
to avoid erroneous results. As shown in table
3, both methods yield similar results and the
hBN-GAP agrees very well with DFT.
Evaluating the performance of established
potentials, both Tersoff and ExTeP suffer from
their unsatisfactorily short cut-off predicting
infinite compressibility for any reasonable ge-
ometry. Therefore, no values are included for
elastic constants dependent on out-of-plane
strain. By applying the ILP correction both
tuned potentials perform very well compared
to DFT and experiments. While they are 2 to
4 GPa less accurate for the in-plane constants
they show an even better agreement for C13
and C44 than the hBN-GAP. Despite this good
performance, it should be noted that the high
accuracy seems to be mainly based on the ILP
correction. Therefore, doubts must be cast on
the predictive capability of these potentials for
isolated hBN sheets and nanotubes as the ILP
has no contribution to the potential energy in
these cases.
For low-dimensional materials, it has been
shown that phonon modes affect adsorbate
(notably water) diffusion through carbon nan-
otubes27 and across graphene.93 Other relevant
thermodynamic properties, such as heat ca-
pacity, thermal conductivity, and thermal ex-
pansion coefficients are also closely linked to
phonons. Therefore, an accurate description
of the dynamics of the lattice is an essential
requirement for the hBN-GAP.
Before discussing the performance of the
hBN-GAP, it is important to emphasise some
essential aspects in the calculation of the
phonon dispersion curves for hBN. In princi-
ple, phonon frequencies are readily calculated
using the finite displacement method wherein
the force matrix is constructed based on the
displacement of a single atom while the re-
maining ions are held at their equilibrium po-
sition. In the case of polar bulk materials,
9
A B
C
Figure 3: Phonon dispersion curves calculated
for different phases of hBN. The black data
corresponds to the reference DFT (optB86b-
vdW) while the red data represents our hBN-
GAP. (A) Phonon dispersion for an isolated
hBN sheet. (B) Predicted dispersion curves for
bulk hBN. The deviations close to Γ stem from
an implicit treatment of charges (see main text
for more details). (C) Phonon dispersion for a
selected nanotube with chirality (6,6) as well as
the density of states (DOS) predicted with GAP
and DFT. The blue line corresponds to the nor-
malised deviation between the individual DOS.
Due to the number of bands, the phonon dis-
persion for other force fields are included in the
supplementary information.
however, a dipole is induced by the longitudi-
nal optical (LO) phonon modes which creates a
macroscopic electric field resulting in an upshift
of the LO frequencies in the long wavelength
limit, i.e. q → 0. The non-degeneracy of LO
and the transverse optical (TO) modes close to
the Γ -point, also known as LO-TO splitting,
complicates the determination of phonon dis-
persion curves within the finite displacement
method. Theoretically, an infinitely large su-
percell is required to calculate the frequencies
at very small wavevectors exactly.94 This can
be avoided by adding a non-analytical correc-
tion to the dynamic matrix based on the Born
effective charges as shown by Gonze et al.95,96
The required Born effective charges can be
easily obtained within density functional per-
turbation theory (DFPT).97 As an alternative
to the finite displacement, the analytical part
of the dynamic matrix is also readily calculated
by the linear response of the electron density
providing the entire dispersion curve based on
the unit cell only.98
Here, as first-principle reference we conduct
DFPT calculations because it has been shown
that the LO-TO splitting vanishes for 1D and
2D structures99,100 and an appropriate treat-
ment of the Coulombic interactions has recently
been implemented101 in the DFPT framework
in the QUANTUM ESPRESSO (QE)102,103
software package. Equivalent setups for the
DFPT and DFT calculations conducted with
QE and VASP, respectively, were used. We
ensured a high agreement between both codes
throughout different properties and a more
detailed comparison can be found in the sup-
plementary information. For GAP and other
potentials the phonon dispersion curves are cal-
culated using the finite displacement method
provided by the Phonopy package.104 For po-
tentials treating charges explicitly, contribu-
tions due to the non-analytical correction ac-
cording to Gonze et al.95,96 can be added. This,
however, does not apply for the bond-order po-
tentials and the hBN-GAP.
In this work, we compare the phonon disper-
sion of a hBN single layer, bulk hBN, and a hBN
nanotube with chirality (6,6). Excellent agree-
ment was obtained between our DFT reference
and inelastic X-ray scattering (IXS) measure-
ments105–108 for bulk hBN which is reported
in the supplementary information. The disper-
sion curves computed with DFT and hBN-GAP
are shown in figure 3 and the performance of
other force fields can be found in the supple-
mentary information. As shown in figure 3A
the GAP achieves a very good agreement with
its DFT reference, particularly for the acous-
tic modes. The predicted frequencies of the
optical branches at the Γ-point are correct to
< 5 meV. GAP is not able to reproduce the fi-
10
nite slope of the LO dispersion close to the zone
center. Despite a vanishing LO-TO splitting,
the generated electric field still causes a non-
zero slope which can be captured by adding
the non-analytical correction to the dynamic
matrix as described above.101 As charges and
related electrostatics are treated implicitly, the
current version of the hBN-GAP cannot repro-
duce this characteristic behaviour. While this
also applies for the LO-TO splitting of bulk
hBN shown in figure 3B, all other features of
the dispersion curve are captured with an error
of < 3 meV also for out-of-plane wavevectors.
The good performance of the hBN-GAP for
the vibrations in layered hBN becomes even
more apparent when comparing to existing
force fields shown in the supplementary infor-
mation. Both the Tersoff and ExTeP potentials
provide a good though less accurate description
of the acoustic modes yielding deviations of
more than 20 meV. Further, the phonon energy
of the optical modes, particularly LO and TO,
is overestimated by up to 40 meV for both po-
tentials. Applying the ILP to the bond-order
potentials results in an accurate description of
the acoustic modes between A and Γ for bulk
hBN, however, the higher frequency modes are
almost unaffected by the correction. As with
the hBN-GAP, the LO-TO splitting cannot be
captured by these potentials due to the lack of
explicit charges.
To understand the performance of the hBN-
GAP for a (6,6) nanotube, we focus on the
overall phonon density of states (DOS) rather
than individual bands due to the large num-
ber of atoms in the unit cell. As depicted in
figure 3C, the hBN-GAP reproduces the DFT
results very well showing only small deviations
of typically < 3 meV. The DOS predicted by
the hBN-GAP is almost congruent with the one
obtained from DFT calculations. For the estab-
lished force fields we observe a similar trend to
layered hBN. While the low energy modes are
described sufficiently accurately yielding devia-
tions of about 7 meV, the high energy modes
shifted by more than 30 meV for both Tersoff
and ExTeP potential (see supplementary infor-
mation).
Application to rippling in
hBN and graphene
After the careful validation in the previous
section, we focus on the application of the
hBN-GAP to investigate rippling in single
layer hBN in comparison to graphene. Al-
though their name may suggest otherwise, these
2D materials are not perfectly flat at finite
temperature but exhibit local height fluctua-
tions.21,26,56,109–112 These thermally activated
ripples are caused by anharmonic coupling be-
tween bending and stretching modes and are an
intrinsic feature of 2D materials, stabilising the
crystal.20,89,113–115 Moreover, the corrugation of
the surface can strongly affect the material’s
properties22–24 indicating a close link between
atomic and electronic structure. The behaviour
of the 2D crystal is, thus, directly affected by
the average amplitude of the height fluctua-
tions, 〈h〉, which, according to the theory of
flexible membranes,113–115 scales with the sys-
tem size, L, as 〈h〉 ∝ L1−η/2, with η being
the anomalous rigidity exponent. While the
results of atomistic simulations on graphene56
and a general nonperturbative renormalisation-
group approach116 suggest the transferability
of η = 0.85, yet, despite the existence of pre-
vious studies on rippling in hBN,110,117,118 it is
unclear whether an identical scaling exponent
can be applied to hBN. Here, we first utilise
the hBN-GAP to determine η based on MD
simulations following the procedure described
by Los et al.56 For the sake of comparabil-
ity, we also compute η for graphene using the
same methodology whereby the interatomic in-
teractions are described by the graphene-GAP
potential.67 However, as the actual shape and
amplitude of the ripples can be strongly altered
by externally introduced strain,26,93,112 we sub-
sequently analyse the impact of tension and
compression on the mean amplitude and phase
behaviour of both materials.
All simulations were performed in LAMMPS119
using a hexagonal simulation box comprising
11
7200 atoms applying a timestep of 1 fs. The un-
strained sheets span a size of 15×15 nm varying
slightly according to the respective bond length.
While this scale is beyond the usually accessible
system size for DFT-based MD, GAP models
can easily cope with these dimensions. First,
we sampled the equilibrium lattice parameter
of both materials at 300 K and zero external
pressure in the isothermal-isobaric ensemble.
A Nosé-Hoover chain thermostat and barostat
was applied to ensure the target temperature
and pressure. Then, we adjusted the systems’
dimensions to sample the configurational space
of the unstrained sheets in the canonical en-
semble. In an analogous manner, we adapted
the box dimensions to achieve relative strains
between −2.0 % and +2.0 % to study the shape
of mechanically induced ripples. The sampling
time for all considered strains was roughly 0.5
ns.
The scaling exponent η was then computed
based on the comparison between the results
of our atomistic simulations and the prediction
of the normal-normal correlation G(q) func-
tion provided by the theory of flexible mem-
branes.113–115 A general expression for G(q) is
given by the Dyson equation
G−1(q) = G−10 (q) + Σ(q) , (2)
where G0(q) represents the harmonic approxi-
mation,
G0(q) =
TN
κS0q2
, (3)
and Σ(q) is the self energy accounting for the
anharmonic coupling at small wavevectors,
Σ(q) =
AS0
N
q2
(
q0
q
)η
, (4)
with q as length of the 2D wavevector q, T
as temperature in energy units, N as num-
ber of atoms, κ as bending rigidity, S0 as area
per atom, A as an unknown prefactor, q0 =
2π
√
B/κ, B as 2D bulk modulus, and η as
the desired scaling exponent. In the limit of
slowly varying height fluctuations (|∇h|2 � 1),
G(q) as defined in equation 2 is identical to
q2〈|h(q)|2〉, where h(q) represents the Fourier
transform of the atomic out-of-plane displace-
ment, h(x), which is directly obtained from
a MD trajectory.21,56,109 In practice, however,
h(x) is smoothed by averaging over the nearest
neighbours before numerically calculating the
Fourier components.109 Further, the wavevec-
tors are restricted by the system size to a min-
imum length of 2π/L corresponding to ≈ 0.048
Å
−1
for our system, which has been shown to
be sufficiently small to access the anharmonic
region.56
Figure 4: Normal-normal correlation function
G(q)/N calculated for graphene and hBN based
on MD simulations using the hBN-GAP and the
graphene-GAP, respectively. The pale mark-
ers correspond to the numerical results directly
obtained from our simulations. This data was
then smoothed and averaged within small inter-
vals of wavevectors which is represented by the
continuous line including error bars. The dot-
ted lines imply the asymptotic behaviour with
power-law q−2 for the harmonic approximation
for large q and q−(2−η) for long wavelengths
where the anharmonic contributions dominate.
For graphene and hBN values of η = 0.87 and
η = 0.83, respectively, are obtained
Figure 4 depicts G(q)/N calculated from
the MD trajectories for unstrained hBN and
graphene. While for large wavevectors the
continuum theory breaks down, G(q) is accu-
12
rately reproduced by the harmonic approxima-
tion G0(q) for wavevectors in range q
∗ . q .
1 Å
−1
where q∗ is given by the Ginzburg crite-
rion115
q∗ =
√
3TB
8πκ2
, (5)
quantifying the long-wavelength limit where
anharmonic contributions become dominant.
We extracted the bending rigidity κ at 300 K
for both materials by comparing equation
3 to the simulation results for wavevectors
0.3 < q < 1 Å
−1
yielding κ = 1.14 eV and
κ = 1.65 eV for hBN and graphene, respec-
tively. As these values seem very high in com-
parison to previous work using classical po-
tentials,21,56,110 we computed κ at 0 K based
on the out-of-plane acoustic phonon branch
(ZA)120 for both GAP models. The results of
κ = 0.90 eV and κ = 1.58 eV for hBN and
graphene, respectively, agree very well with
previous DFT calculations.121,122
We now focus on the long-wavelength simu-
lation data in the range q ≤ q∗ which we com-
pare to the anharmonic self energy Σ(q) given
by equation 4. Due to the rather weak tem-
perature dependence of the 2D bulk modulus
B,123 we used the predicted values of the GAP
models for 0 K which are B = 11.19 eV/Å
2
and B = 13.59 eV/Å
2
for hBN and graphene,
respectively. Further, to be comparable with
previous work21,56 we fixed the prefactor A = 1.
This way, a best fit to the simulation data yields
scaling exponents of η = 0.83 for hBN and
η = 0.87 for graphene which agree very well
with established findings.56,116 The small devi-
ations between the materials might be caused
by the limited availability of fitting data in the
long-wavelength range. While larger systems
are required to resolve this issue, this should
only have an influence in the order of 10−2 for
the scaling exponent. Our results, therefore,
confirm the observation made by Los et al.56
that the scaling exponent is independent of the
bending rigidity κ. In fact, our findings go
beyond this statement by revealing an almost
identical scaling behaviour for two different ma-
terials, hinting at the possibility of a universal
value of η ≈ 0.85 for 2D materials. Conversely,
the distinct materials’ properties strongly affect
the actual height of the ripples where small val-
ues of κ result in larger height fluctuations as
shown by the shift of hBN in figure 4. Also, ac-
cording to equation 5 the crossover between the
harmonic and anharmonic regime is switched
to lower q for lower values of B/κ2 which is also
confirmed by our results.
So far, we have shown that the scaling be-
haviour of ripples is almost identical in hBN
and graphene while the amplitude of the out-
of-plane deviations for a given system size will
be slightly larger in hBN than in graphene.
However, these findings apply in the limit of
no external strain. To go beyond this, we anal-
yse the average height of these mechanically
induced ripples based on MD trajectories of
hBN and graphene exposed to different inten-
sities of strain. To this end, we determined the
atom which shows the highest deviation from
the centre mass perpendicular to the flat sheet.
This measure is then averaged over the entire
trajectory and the respective error based on
block averages was computed to quantify the
uncertainty. We also evaluated the influence of
the box geometry on the shape and amplitude
of the ripples in compressed systems. While the
shape changes significantly from a hexagonal to
an orthorombic simulation box the magnitude
of the height fluctuations is almost unaffected
(see supplementary material).
In analogy to our findings for the unstrained
systems, ripples in hBN and graphene show a
very similar reaction to strain as shown in fig-
ure 5A. The measured amplitudes agree with
previous simulation work based on established
force fields for both graphene93 and hBN.118
Throughout the entire strain range, hBN shows
a larger average rippling height than graphene
due to its lower bending rigidity κ. Large neg-
ative strains lead to a compression of the 2D
sheets as the system stabilises by deforming
in the third dimension while uniaxial tension
causes the amplitude of the out-of-plane de-
formations to shrink. We observed a phase
transition from short-lived fluctuations (figure
13
A
B
C
Figure 5: (A) Averaged out-of-plane devia-
tion as function of applied strain for hBN (red)
and graphene (black) predicted by the hBN-
GAP and graphene GAP, respectively.(B-C)
Snapshot of the MD simulations for an un-
strained and hBN monolayer and compression
of −2.0%. The atoms are coloured according
to their displacement from the center of mass
in z-direction. The simulation box is indicated
in black and the scale bar in the bottom left
represents 2 nm.
5B) to spatially coherent soliton-like ripples
(figure 5C) which takes place between a strain
of −0.25% and −0.5% for both materials. This
is in line with simulations performed on isolated
graphene sheets.93 Interestingly, for multilay-
ered graphene previous simulations124 have led
to the suggestion that a much higher strain of
−2.8% is required to induce spatially coherent
ripples. Exploring this issue for hBN and the
impact of vdW forces between multiple layers
on the phase transition of ripples is a fascinat-
ing field and will be subject of future work.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that these
studies on ripples show that the hBN-GAP
proves to be transferable to system sizes outside
both the training set and the accessible scale
of DFT. Indeed, the predicted phase transition
from figure 5B to a rippling pattern as in fig-
ure 5C is exclusively based on an interpolation
between the local environments in the training
set.
Conclusion
In this work, we introduced a machine learning-
based atomistic model to treat different phases
of hBN ranging from isolated sheets to the
bulk phase and nanotubes of any chirality. Our
model was constructed using the GAP method-
ology and was trained on energies, forces, and
virial stresses obtained from tightly converged
vdW-inclusive DFT calculations. We bench-
marked the hBN-GAP against its DFT ref-
erence and other established potentials and
demonstrated its capabilities through a vari-
ety of tests including the elastic constants and
the phonon dispersion spectra for nanotubes
and layered hBN. Based on this validation we
believe to have developed an accurate model,
however, we do not claim perfect accuracy for
each property. Rather, we acknowledge that
the prediction for individual properties may be
compromised due to the variety of configura-
tions and thermodynamic conditions consid-
ered.
We applied our model as part of a compar-
ative analysis of thermally and mechanically
induced rippling in graphene and hBN. In the
course of this study, we found that the bend-
ing rigidities predicted by both GAP models
are significantly larger than reported by previ-
ous work based on established force fields. We
showed that the scaling behaviour of the rip-
14
pling height is with η ≈ 0.85 almost identical
for hBN and graphene and, thus, independent
of material properties. This highlights the gen-
eral applicability of the theory of flexible mem-
branes and indicates that η = 0.85 could be
universally valid for 2D materials. Testing this
suggestion on other 2D materials (e.g. clays
and transition metal dichalcogenides) would
make interesting work for the future. In con-
trast to the scaling behaviour, however, the
actual height of the out-of-plane deviations for
a given system size is directly affected by the
material’s resistance to bending showing larger
values for hBN. This observation also holds for
mechanically deformed ripples irrespective of
whether the system was exposed to compres-
sion or tension. Eventually, the phase transi-
tion from randomly fluctuating to soliton-like
ripples occurs at roughly the same strain rate
for both materials.
It is important, however, to point out some
of the limitations and shortcomings of our po-
tential. Despite being computationally several
orders of magnitude more efficient than DFT,
the evaluation of the SOAP descriptor is de-
manding and the hBN-GAP is roughly three
order of magnitude more expensive than the
established hBN force fields. Although we ex-
tended the range of the 2B descriptor to 10 Å,
our model is constrained by its finite cut-off
and is, thus, not able to appropriately treat
long-range interactions due to electrostatics or
dispersion. Further, treating charges only im-
plicitly prevents a correct description of the
phonon dispersion curves at small wavevectors.
Additionally, in reality hBN is inevitably found
with defects and dopants are incorporated in
the crystal’s lattice.125 While we did not con-
sider such systems in this study, they will be
part of future extensions of our training set and
GAP model.
Looking forward, future applications of the
hBN-GAP could involve the study of how rip-
pling is affected by dispersion interactions in
bilayer and multilayer hBN. Another applica-
tion may include treating our model as struc-
ture generator for rippled sheets to investigate
the impact of the corrugation on proton trans-
fer52,126 and the adsorption and, potentially,
permeation of small atoms and molecules with
DFT.127,128 Moreover, the hBN-GAP can be
readily combined with any other force field
and, thus, could be used to study the interface
with fluids such as liquid water. In this con-
text, a high resolution of the phonon modes, as
achieved with our model, is essential as adsor-
bate motion on layered materials, and through
nanotubes couples with phonon modes of the
solid.27–30
We have made our potential as well as train-
ing and evaluation sets freely available at [http:
//www.libatoms.com]. The hBN-GAP can
be readily applied within the QUIP software
package and used to run MD simulations in
LAMMPS.119
Supporting Information Avail-
able
The following files are available free of charge.
The Supporting Information is available free
of charge on the ACS Publications website at
DOI: .
Comparison of DFT functionals.
Benchmarking of the hBN GAP includ-
ing formation energies of nanotubes, the
binding curve in bulk hBN, as well as the
computational efficiency.
Phonon dispersion curves predicted by
the various force fields.
Analysis of the impact of box shape and
box size on the predicted rippling ampli-
tudes.
Acknowledgement We thank Gábor Csányi
for fruitful discussions and valuable advice dur-
ing the fitting process of the GAP model.
We also thank Piero Gasparotto for his guid-
ance and support in creating the sketch-map.
The authors are grateful to the UK Materi-
als and Molecular Modelling Hub for compu-
tational resources, which is partially funded
15
http://www.libatoms.com
http://www.libatoms.com
by EPSRC (EP/P020194/1). Via our mem-
bership of the UK’s HEC Materials Chem-
istry Consortium, which is funded by EPSRC
(EP/L000202, EP/R029431), this work used
the ARCHER UK National Supercomputing
Service (http://www.archer.ac.uk). Addition-
ally, we are also grateful for the use of the
UCL Grace High Performance Computing Fa-
cility (Grace@UCL), and associated support
services, in the completion of this work. Sim-
ilarly, we are also grateful for the use of the
Imperial College Research Computing Service,
DOI: 10.14469/hpc/2232.
References
(1) Watanabe, K.; Taniguchi, T.; Kanda, H.
Direct-bandgap properties and evidence
for ultraviolet lasing of hexagonal boron
nitride single crystal. Nature Materials
2004, 3, 404–409.
(2) Chen, Y.; Zou, J.; Campbell, S. J.;
Caer, G. L. Boron nitride nanotubes:
Pronounced resistance to oxidation. Ap-
plied Physics Letters 2004, 84, 2430–
2432.
(3) Pakdel, A.; Bando, Y.; Golberg, D. Nano
boron nitride flatland. Chemical Society
Reviews 2014, 43, 934–959.
(4) Geim, A. K.; Grigorieva, I. V. Van der
Waals heterostructures. Nature 2013,
499, 419–425.
(5) Britnell, L.; Gorbachev, R. V.; Jalil, R.;
Belle, B. D.; Schedin, F.; Mishchenko, A.;
Georgiou, T.; Katsnelson, M. I.;
Eaves, L.; Morozov, S. V. et al. Field-
Effect Tunneling Transistor Based on
Vertical Graphene Heterostructures.
Science 2012, 335, 947–951.
(6) Xia, F.; Wang, H.; Xiao, D.; Dubey, M.;
Ramasubramaniam, A. Two-dimensional
material nanophotonics. Nature Photon-
ics 2014, 8, 899–907.
(7) Lei, W.; Portehault, D.; Liu, D.;
Qin, S.; Chen, Y. Porous boron nitride
nanosheets for effective water cleaning.
Nature Communications 2013, 4, 1777.
(8) Zhi, C.; Xu, Y.; Bando, Y.; Gol-
berg, D. Highly thermo-conductive fluid
with boron nitride nanofillers. ACS Nano
2011, 5, 6571–6577.
(9) Taha-Tijerina, J.; Narayanan, T. N.;
Gao, G.; Rohde, M.; Tsentalovich, D. A.;
Pasquali, M.; Ajayan, P. M. Electrically
insulating thermal nano-oils using 2D
fillers. ACS Nano 2012, 6, 1214–1220.
16
(10) Krishnam, M.; Bose, S.; Das, C. Boron
nitride (BN) nanofluids as cooling agent
in thermal management system (TMS).
Applied Thermal Engineering 2016, 106,
951–958.
(11) Zhao, H.; Ding, J.; Xu, B.; Zhao, X.;
Zheng, Y.; Shao, Z.; Yu, H. Green Syn-
thesis of Graphene/Boron Nitride Com-
posites for Ultrahigh Thermally Conduc-
tive Fluids. ACS Sustainable Chemistry
and Engineering 2019, 7, 14266–14272.
(12) Ciofani, G.; Danti, S.; Genchi, G. G.;
Mazzolai, B.; Mattoli, V. Boron nitride
nanotubes: Biocompatibility and poten-
tial spill-over in nanomedicine. Small
2013, 9, 1672–1685.
(13) Weng, Q.; Wang, B.; Wang, X.; Hana-
gata, N.; Li, X.; Liu, D.; Wang, X.;
Jiang, X.; Bando, Y.; Golberg, D. Highly
water-soluble, porous, and biocompatible
boron nitrides for anticancer drug deliv-
ery. ACS Nano 2014, 8, 6123–6130.
(14) Weng, Q.; Wang, X.; Wang, X.;
Bando, Y.; Golberg, D. Functionalized
hexagonal boron nitride nanomaterials:
Emerging properties and applications.
Chemical Society Reviews 2016, 45,
3989–4012.
(15) Secchi, E.; Marbach, S.; Niguès, A.;
Stein, D.; Siria, A.; Bocquet, L. Massive
radius-dependent flow slippage in carbon
nanotubes. Nature 2016, 537, 210–213.
(16) Siria, A.; Poncharal, P.; Biance, A. L.;
Fulcrand, R.; Blase, X.; Purcell, S. T.;
Bocquet, L. Giant osmotic energy conver-
sion measured in a single transmembrane
boron nitride nanotube. Nature 2013,
494, 455–458.
(17) Grosjean, B.; Pean, C.; Siria, A.;
Bocquet, L.; Vuilleumier, R.; Boc-
quet, M. L. Chemisorption of Hydroxide
on 2D Materials from DFT Calculations:
Graphene versus Hexagonal Boron Ni-
tride. Journal of Physical Chemistry Let-
ters 2016, 7, 4695–4700.
(18) Secchi, E.; Niguès, A.; Jubin, L.;
Siria, A.; Bocquet, L. Scaling behavior
for ionic transport and its fluctuations
in individual carbon nanotubes. Physical
Review Letters 2016, 116, 154501.
(19) Siria, A.; Bocquet, M.-L.; Bocquet, L.
New avenues for the large-scale harvest-
ing of blue energy. Nature Reviews Chem-
istry 2017, 1, 0091.
(20) Meyer, J. C.; Geim, A. K.; Katsnel-
son, M. I.; Novoselov, K. S.; Booth, T. J.;
Roth, S. The structure of suspended
graphene sheets. Nature 2007, 446, 60–
63.
(21) Fasolino, A.; Los, J. H.; Katsnelson, M. I.
Intrinsic ripples in graphene. Nature Ma-
terials 2007, 6, 858–861.
(22) Guinea, F.; Horovitz, B.; Le Dous-
sal, P. Gauge field induced by ripples
in graphene. Physical Review B - Con-
densed Matter and Materials Physics
2008, 77, 205421.
(23) Guinea, F.; Katsnelson, M. I.; Vozme-
diano, M. A. Midgap states and charge
inhomogeneities in corrugated graphene.
Physical Review B - Condensed Matter
and Materials Physics 2008, 77, 075422.
(24) Vázquez De Parga, A. L.; Calleja, F.;
Borca, B.; Passeggi, M. C.; Hinare-
jos, J. J.; Guinea, F.; Miranda, R.
Periodically rippled graphene: Growth
and spatially resolved electronic struc-
ture. Physical Review Letters 2008, 100,
056807.
(25) Boukhvalov, D. W.; Katsnelson, M. I.
Enhancement of chemical activity in cor-
rugated graphene. Journal of Physical
Chemistry C 2009, 113, 14176–14178.
(26) Bao, W.; Miao, F.; Chen, Z.; Zhang, H.;
Jang, W.; Dames, C.; Lau, C. N. Con-
trolled ripple texturing of suspended
graphene and ultrathin graphite mem-
branes. Nature Nanotechnology 2009, 4,
562–566.
17
(27) Ma, M.; Grey, F.; Shen, L.; Urbakh, M.;
Wu, S.; Liu, J. Z.; Liu, Y.; Zheng, Q.
Water transport inside carbon nanotubes
mediated by phonon-induced oscillating
friction. Nature Nanotechnology 2015,
10, 692–695.
(28) Ghoufi, A.; Szymczyk, A.; Malfreyt, P.
Ultrafast diffusion of Ionic Liquids Con-
fined in Carbon Nanotubes. Scientific
Reports 2016, 6, 28518.
(29) Cruz-Chú, E. R.; Papadopoulou, E.;
Walther, J. H.; Popadić, A.; Li, G.;
Praprotnik, M.; Koumoutsakos, P. On
phonons and water flow enhancement in
carbon nanotubes. Nature Nanotechnol-
ogy 2017, 12, 1106–1108.
(30) Marbach, S.; Dean, D. S.; Bocquet, L.
Transport and dispersion across wiggling
nanopores. Nature Physics 2018, 14,
1108–1113.
(31) Tersoff, J. New Empirical Model for the
Structural Properties of Silicon. Physical
Review Letters 1986, 56, 632–635.
(32) Tersoff, J. Empirical Interatomic Po-
tential for Carbon, with Applications
to Amorphous Carbon. Physical Review
Letters 1988, 61, 2879–2882.
(33) Tersoff, J. Modeling solid-state chem-
istry: Interatomic potentials for multi-
component systems. Physical Review B
1989, 39, 5566–5568.
(34) Brenner, D. W. Empirical potential for
hydrocarbons for use in simulating the
chemical vapor deposition of diamond
film. Physical Review B 1990, 42, 9458–
9471.
(35) Albe, K.; Möller, W.; Heinig, K. H. Com-
puter simulation and boron nitride. Radi-
ation Effects and Defects in Solids 1997,
141, 85–97.
(36) Sekkal, W.; Bouhafs, B.; Aourag, H.;
Certier, M. Molecular-dynamics simula-
tion of structural and thermodynamic
properties of boron nitride. Journal of
Physics Condensed Matter 1998, 10,
4975–4984.
(37) Matsunaga, K.; Fisher, C.; Matsub-
ara, H. Tersoff Potential Parameters for
Simulating Cubic Boron Carbonitrides
solid solution model Tersoff Potential
Parameters for Simulating Cubic Boron
Carbonitrides. Japanese Journal of Ap-
plied Physics 2000, 39, 48–51.
(38) Matsunaga, K.; Iwamoto, Y. Molecular
Dynamics Study of Atomic Structure and
Diffusion Behavior in Amorphous Sili-
con Nitride Containing Boron. Journal of
the American Ceramic Society 2001, 84,
2213–2219.
(39) Sevik, C.; Kınacı, A.; Haskins, J. B.;
Çağın, T. Characterization of thermal
transport in low-dimensional boron ni-
tride nanostructures. Physical Review B -
Condensed Matter and Materials Physics
2011, 84, 085409.
(40) Kınacı, A.; Haskins, J. B.; Sevik, C.;
Çağın, T. Thermal conductivity of BN-
C nanostructures. Physical Review B -
Condensed Matter and Materials Physics
2012, 86, 115410.
(41) Los, J. H.; Kroes, J. M.; Albe, K.;
Gordillo, R. M.; Katsnelson, M. I.; Fa-
solino, A. Extended Tersoff potential
for boron nitride: Energetics and elas-
tic properties of pristine and defective
h -BN. Physical Review B 2017, 96,
184108.
(42) van Duin, A. C. T.; Dasgupta, S.; Lo-
rant, F.; Goddard III, W. A. ReaxFF: A
Reactive Force Field for Hydrocarbons.
Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2001,
105, 9396–9409.
(43) Chenoweth, K.; Van Duin, A. C.; God-
dard, W. A. ReaxFF reactive force field
for molecular dynamics simulations of
hydrocarbon oxidation. Journal of Phys-
ical Chemistry A 2008, 112, 1040–1053.
18
(44) Weismiller, M. R.; Duin, A. C.; Lee, J.;
Yetter, R. A. ReaxFF reactive force
field development and applications for
molecular dynamics simulations of am-
monia borane dehydrogenation and com-
bustion. Journal of Physical Chemistry A
2010, 114, 5485–5492.
(45) Paupitz, R.; Junkermeier, C. E.; van
Duin, A. C.; Branicio, P. S. Fullerenes
generated from porous structures. Phys-
ical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2014,
16, 25515–25522.
(46) Liu, S.; Van Duin, A. C.; Van
Duin, D. M.; Liu, B.; Edgar, J. H. Atom-
istic Insights into Nucleation and For-
mation of Hexagonal Boron Nitride on
Nickel from First-Principles-Based Re-
active Molecular Dynamics Simulations.
ACS Nano 2017, 11, 3585–3596.
(47) Rajan, A. G.; Strano, M. S.;
Blankschtein, D. Ab Initio Molecular
Dynamics and Lattice Dynamics-Based
Force Field for Modeling Hexagonal
Boron Nitride in Mechanical and Inter-
facial Applications. Journal of Physical
Chemistry Letters 2018, 9, 1584–1591.
(48) Mortazavi, B.; Rémond, Y. Investigation
of tensile response and thermal conduc-
tivity of boron-nitride nanosheets using
molecular dynamics simulations. Phys-
ica E: Low-Dimensional Systems and
Nanostructures 2012, 44, 1846–1852.
(49) Liao, M.-L.; Lian, T.-W.; Ju, S.-P. Ten-
sile and compressive behaviours of a
boron nitride nanotube: Temperature
effects. Materials Science Forum 2012,
700, 125–128.
(50) Krishnan, N. M. A.; Ghosh, D. Defect in-
duced plasticity and failure mechanism of
boron nitride nanotubes under tension.
Journal of Applied Physics 2014, 116,
044313.
(51) Le, M. Q.; Nguyen, D. T. Atomistic sim-
ulations of pristine and defective hexag-
onal BN and SiC sheets under uniaxial
tension. Materials Science and Engineer-
ing A 2014, 615, 481–488.
(52) Hu, S.; Lozada-Hidalgo, M.; Wang, F. C.;
Mishchenko, A.; Schedin, F.; Nair, R. R.;
Hill, E. W.; Boukhvalov, D. W.; Katsnel-
son, M. I.; Dryfe, R. A. et al. Proton
transport through one-atom-thick crys-
tals. Nature 2014, 516, 227–230.
(53) Tocci, G.; Joly, L.; Michaelides, A. Fric-
tion of water on graphene and hexago-
nal boron nitride from Ab initio meth-
ods: Very different slippage despite very
similar interface structures. Nano Letters
2014, 14, 6872–6877.
(54) Androulidakis, C.; Koukaras, E. N.;
Poss, M.; Papagelis, K.; Galiotis, C.;
Tawfick, S. Strained hexagonal boron ni-
tride: Phonon shift and Grüneisen pa-
rameter. Physical Review B 2018, 97,
241414.
(55) Simonnin, P.; Noetinger, B.; Nieto-
Draghi, C.; Marry, V.; Rotenberg, B.
Diffusion under Confinement: Hydrody-
namic Finite-Size Effects in Simulation.
Journal of Chemical Theory and Compu-
tation 2017, 13, 2881–2889.
(56) Los, J. H.; Katsnelson, M. I.;
Yazyev, O. V.; Zakharchenko, K. V.;
Fasolino, A. Scaling properties of flexible
membranes from atomistic simulations:
Application to graphene. Physical
Review B - Condensed Matter and
Materials Physics 2009, 80, 1–4.
(57) Rupp, M.; Tkatchenko, A.; Müller, K. R.;
Von Lilienfeld, O. A. Fast and accurate
modeling of molecular atomization ener-
gies with machine learning. Physical Re-
view Letters 2012, 108, 058301.
(58) Behler, J. Perspective : Machine learn-
ing potentials for atomistic simulations.
Journal of Chemical Physics 2016, 145,
170901.
19
(59) Bartók, A. P.; Csányi, G.; Ker-
mode, J. R.; De, S.; Bernstein, N.; Ceri-
otti, M.; Bartók, A. P.; Poelking, C. Ma-
chine learning unifies the modeling of ma-
terials and molecules. Science Advances
2017, 3, e1701816.
(60) Botu, V.; Batra, R.; Chapman, J.; Ram-
prasad, R. Machine learning force fields:
Construction, validation, and outlook.
Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2017,
121, 511–522.
(61) Behler, J.; Parrinello, M. General-
ized neural-network representation of
high-dimensional potential-energy sur-
faces. Physical Review Letters 2007, 98,
146401.
(62) Bartók, A. P.; Payne, M. C.; Kondor, R.;
Csányi, G. Gaussian Approximation Po-
tentials : The Accuracy of Quantum Me-
chanics , without the Electrons. Physical
Review Letters 2010, 104, 136403.
(63) Li, Z.; Kermode, J. R.; De Vita, A.
Molecular Dynamics with On-the-
Fly Machine Learning of Quantum-
Mechanical Forces. Physical Review
Letters 2015, 114, 096405.
(64) Chmiela, S.; Tkatchenko, A.;
Sauceda, H. E.; Poltavsky, I.;
Schütt, K. T.; Müller, K. R. Machine
learning of accurate energy-conserving
molecular force fields. Science Advances
2017, 3, e1603015.
(65) Nguyen, T. T.; Székely, E.; Im-
balzano, G.; Behler, J.; Csányi, G.; Ce-
riotti, M.; Götz, A. W.; Paesani, F.
Comparison of permutationally invariant
polynomials, neural networks, and Gaus-
sian approximation potentials in repre-
senting water interactions through many-
body expansions. Journal of Chemical
Physics 2018, 148, 241725.
(66) Bartók, A. P.; Csányi, G. Gaussian ap-
proximation potentials: A brief tuto-
rial introduction. International Journal
of Quantum Chemistry 2015, 115, 1051–
1057.
(67) Rowe, P.; Csányi, G.; Alfè, D.;
Michaelides, A. Development of a ma-
chine learning potential for graphene.
Physical Review B 2018, 97, 054303.
(68) Deringer, V. L.; Csányi, G. Machine
learning based interatomic potential for
amorphous carbon. Physical Review B
2017, 95, 094203.
(69) Rowe, P.; Deringer, V. L.; Gas-
parotto, P.; Csányi, G.; Michaelides, A.
An Accurate and Transferable Machine
Learning Potential for Carbon. Journal
of Chemical Physics 2020, submitted,
arXiv:1011.1669v3.
(70) Szlachta, W. J.; Bartók, A. P.; Csányi, G.
Accuracy and transferability of GAP
models for tungsten. Physical Review B
2014, 90, 104108.
(71) Jinnouchi, R.; Lahnsteiner, J.; Kar-
sai, F.; Kresse, G.; Bokdam, M. Phase
Transitions of Hybrid Perovskites Simu-
lated by Machine-Learning Force Fields
Trained on the Fly with Bayesian Infer-
ence. Physical Review Letters 2019, 122,
225701.
(72) De, S.; Bartók, A. P.; Csányi, G.; Ceri-
otti, M. Comparing molecules and solids
across structural and alchemical space.
Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics
2016, 18, 13754–13769.
(73) Bartók, A. P.; Kondor, R.; Csányi, G.
On representing chemical environments.
Physical Review B - Condensed Matter
and Materials Physics 2013, 87, 184115.
(74) Kresse, G.; Hafner, J. Ab initio molecu-
lar dynamics for liquid metals. Physical
Review B 1993, 47, 558–561.
(75) Kresse, G.; Hafner, J. Ab initio
molecular-dynamics simulation of
the liquid-metalamorphous- semiconduc-
tor transition in germanium. Physical
Review B 1994, 49, 14251–14269.
20
(76) Kresse, G.; Furthmüller, J. Efficient it-
erative schemes for ab initio total-energy
calculations using a plane-wave basis set.
Physical Review B - Condensed Matter
and Materials Physics 1996, 54, 11169–
11186.
(77) Kresse, G.; Furthmüller, J. Efficiency
of ab-initio total energy calculations for
metals and semiconductors using a plane-
wave basis set. Computational Materials
Science 1996, 6, 15–50.
(78) Klimeš, J.; Bowler, D. R.;
Michaelides, A. Van der Waals den-
sity functionals applied to solids.
Physical Review B - Condensed Matter
and Materials Physics 2011, 83, 1–13.
(79) Blöchl, P. E. Projector augmented-wave
method. Physical Review B 1994, 50,
17953–17979.
(80) Kresse, G.; Joubert, D. From ultra-
soft pseudopotentials to the projector
augmented-wave method. Physical Re-
view B - Condensed Matter and Mate-
rials Physics 1999, 59, 1758–1775.
(81) Klimeš, J.; Bowler, D. R.;
Michaelides, A. Chemical accuracy
for the van der Waals density functional.
Journal of Physics Condensed Matter
2010, 22, 022201.
(82) Graziano, G.; Klimeš, J.; Fernandez-
Alonso, F.; Michaelides, A. Improved de-
scription of soft layered materials with
van der Waals density functional theory.
Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter
2012, 24, 424216.
(83) Ceriotti, M.; Tribello, G. A.; Par-
rinello, M. Simplifying the representation
of complex free-energy landscapes using
sketch-map. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 2011, 108, 13023–
13028.
(84) Tribello, G. A.; Ceriotti, M.; Par-
rinello, M. Using sketch-map coordinates
to analyze and bias molecular dynamics
simulations. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 2012, 109, 5196–5201.
(85) Leven, I.; Azuri, I.; Kronik, L.; Hod, O.
Inter-layer potential for hexagonal boron
nitride. Journal of Chemical Physics
2014, 140, 104106.
(86) Leven, I.; Maaravi, T.; Azuri, I.; Kro-
nik, L.; Hod, O. Interlayer Potential for
Graphene/h-BN Heterostructures. Jour-
nal of Chemical Theory and Computation
2016, 12, 2896–2905.
(87) Maaravi, T.; Leven, I.; Azuri, I.; Kro-
nik, L.; Hod, O. Interlayer Potential for
Homogeneous Graphene and Hexagonal
Boron Nitride Systems: Reparametriza-
tion for Many-Body Dispersion Effects.
Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2017,
121, 22826–22835.
(88) Solozhenko, V. L.; Will, G.; Elf, F.
Isothermal compression of hexagonal
graphite-like boron nitride up to 12 GPa.
Solid State Communications 1995, 96,
1–3.
(89) Cerda, E.; Mahadevan, L. Geometry and
Physics of Wrinkling. Physical Review
Letters 2003, 90, 074302.
(90) Bosak, A.; Serrano, J.; Krisch, M.;
Watanabe, K.; Taniguchi, T.; Kanda, H.
Elasticity of hexagonal boron nitride: In-
elastic x-ray scattering measurements.
Physical Review B - Condensed Mat-
ter and Materials Physics 2006, 73,
041402(R).
(91) Ohba, N.; Miwa, K.; Nagasako, N.; Fuku-
moto, A. First-principles study on struc-
tural, dielectric, and dynamical proper-
ties for three BN polytypes. Physical Re-
view B - Condensed Matter and Materi-
als Physics 2001, 63, 115207.
(92) Murnaghan, F. D. The Compressibility of
Media Under Extreme Pressure. Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences
21
of the United States of America 1944,
30, 244–247.
(93) Ma, M.; Tocci, G.; Michaelides, A.;
Aeppli, G. Fast diffusion of water nan-
odroplets on graphene. Nature Materials
2016, 15, 66–71.
(94) Alfè, D. PHON: A program to calcu-
late phonons using the small displace-
ment method. Computer Physics Com-
munications 2009, 180, 2622–2633.
(95) Gonze, X.; Charlier, J. C.; Allan, D. C.;
Teter, M. P. Interatomic force constants
from first principles: The case of α-
quartz. Physical Review B 1994, 50,
13035–13038.
(96) Gonze, X.; Lee, C. Dynamical matri-
ces, Born effective charges, dielectric per-
mittivity tensors, and interatomic force
constants from density-functional per-
turbation theory. Physical Review B -
Condensed Matter and Materials Physics
1997, 55, 10355–10368.
(97) Giannozzi, P.; de Gironcoli, S.;
Pavone, P.; Baroni, S. Ab initio
calculation of phonon dispersions in
semiconductors. Physical Review B
1991, 43, 7231–7242.
(98) Baroni, S.; de Gironcoli, S.; Dal Corso, A.
Phonons and related crystal proper-
ties from density-functional perturbation
theory. Reviews of Modern Physics 2001,
73, 515 – 557.
(99) Daniel, S.-P.; Hernández, E. Vibrational
properties of single-wall nanotubes and
monolayers of hexagonal BN. Physical
Review B 2002, 66, 235415.
(100) Wirtz, L.; Rubio, A.; De La Concha, R.;
Loiseau, A. Ab initio calculations of the
lattice dynamics of boron nitride nan-
otubes. Physical Review B - Condensed
Matter and Materials Physics 2003, 68,
045425.
(101) Sohier, T.; Gibertini, M.; Calandra, M.;
Mauri, F.; Marzari, N. Breakdown of
Optical Phonons’ Splitting in Two-
Dimensional Materials. Nano Letters
2017, 17, 3758–3763.
(102) Giannozzi, P.; Baroni, S.; Bonini, N.;
Calandra, M.; Car, R.; Cavazzoni, C.;
Ceresoli, D.; Chiarotti, G. L.; Cococ-
cioni, M.; Dabo, I. et al. QUANTUM
ESPRESSO: A modular and open-source
software project for quantum simulations
of materials. Journal of Physics Con-
densed Matter 2009, 21, 395502.
(103) Giannozzi, P.; Andreussi, O.;
Brumme, T.; Bunau, O.; Buongiorno
Nardelli, M.; Calandra, M.; Car, R.;
Cavazzoni, C.; Ceresoli, D.; Cococ-
cioni, M. et al. Advanced capabilities
for materials modelling with Quan-
tum ESPRESSO. Journal of Physics
Condensed Matter 2017, 29, 465901.
(104) Togo, A.; Tanaka, I. First principles
phonon calculations in materials science.
Scripta Materialia 2015, 108, 1–5.
(105) Geick, R.; Perry, C. H.; Rupprecht, G.
Normal modes in hexagonal boron ni-
tride. Physical Review 1966, 146, 543–
547.
(106) Nemanich, R. J.; Solin, S. A.; Mar-
tin, R. M. Light scattering study of boron
nitride microcrystals. Physical Review B
1981, 23, 6348–6356.
(107) Reich, S.; Ferrari, A. C.; Arenal, R.;
Loiseau, A.; Bello, I.; Robertson, J. Res-
onant Raman scattering in cubic and
hexagonal boron nitride. Physical Re-
view B - Condensed Matter and Mate-
rials Physics 2005, 71, 205201.
(108) Serrano, J.; Bosak, A.; Arenal, R.;
Krisch, M.; Watanabe, K.; Taniguchi, T.;
Kanda, H.; Rubio, A.; Wirtz, L. Vibra-
tional Properties of Hexagonal Boron Ni-
tride : Inelastic X-Ray Scattering and Ab
Initio Calculations. Physical Review Let-
ters 2007, 98, 095503.
22
(109) Zakharchenko, K. V.; Los, J. H.; Katsnel-
son, M. I.; Fasolino, A. Atomistic simu-
lations of structural and thermodynamic
properties of bilayer graphene. Physical
Review B - Condensed Matter and Mate-
rials Physics 2010, 81, 235439.
(110) Slotman, G. J.; Fasolino, A. Structure,
stability and defects of single layer hexag-
onal BN in comparison to graphene.
Journal of Physics Condensed Matter
2013, 25, 045009.
(111) Katsnelson, M. I.; Fasolino, A. Graphene
as a prototype crystalline membrane. Ac-
counts of Chemical Research 2013, 46,
97–105.
(112) Xu, P.; Neek-Amal, M.; Barber, S. D.;
Schoelz, J. K.; Ackerman, M. L.;
Thibado, P. M.; Sadeghi, A.;
Peeters, F. M. Unusual ultra-low-
frequency fluctuations in freestanding
graphene. Nature Communications
2014, 5, 3720.
(113) Nelson, D. R.; Peliti, L. Fluctuations in
Membranes With Crystalline and Hex-
atic Order. Journal de physique Paris
1987, 48, 1085–1092.
(114) Le Doussal, P.; Radzihovsky, L. Self-
consistent theory of polymerized mem-
branes. Physical Review Letters 1992,
69, 1209–1212.
(115) Nelson, D. R., Piran, T., Weinberg, S.,
Eds. Statistical Mechanics of Membranes
and Surfaces, 2nd ed.; World Scientific:
Singapore, 2004.
(116) Kownacki, J. P.; Mouhanna, D. Crum-
pling transition and flat phase of poly-
merized phantom membranes. Physi-
cal Review E - Statistical, Nonlinear,
and Soft Matter Physics 2009, 79,
040101(R).
(117) Thomas, S.; Ajith, K. M.; Chandra, S.;
Valsakumar, M. C. Temperature depen-
dent structural properties and bending
rigidity of pristine and defective hexag-
onal boron nitride. Journal of Physics
Condensed Matter 2015, 27, 315302.
(118) Thomas, S.; Ajith, K. M.; Valsaku-
mar, M. C. Effect of ripples on the finite
temperature elastic properties of hexago-
nal boron nitride using strain-fluctuation
method. Superlattices and Microstruc-
tures 2017, 111, 360–372.
(119) Plimpton, S. Fast Parallel Algorithms for
Short-Range Molecular Dynamics. Jour-
nal of Computational Physics 1995, 117,
1–19.
(120) Karssemeijer, L. J.; Fasolino, A. Phonons
of graphene and graphitic materials
derived from the empirical potential
LCBOPII. Surface Science 2011, 605,
1611–1615.
(121) Wu, J.; Wang, B.; Wei, Y.; Yang, R.;
Dresselhaus, M. Mechanics and mechan-
ically tunable band gap in single-layer
hexagonal boron-nitride. Materials Re-
search Letters 2013, 1, 200–206.
(122) Wei, Y.; Wang, B.; Wu, J.; Yang, R.;
Dunn, M. L. Bending rigidity and Gaus-
sian bending stiffness of single-layered
graphene. Nano Letters 2013, 13, 26–30.
(123) Zakharchenko, K. V.; Katsnelson, M. I.;
Fasolino, A. Finite temperature lattice
properties of graphene beyond the quasi-
harmonic approximation. Physical Re-
view Letters 2009, 102, 046808.
(124) De Lima, A. L.; Müssnich, L. A.;
Manhabosco, T. M.; Chacham, H.;
Batista, R. J.; De Oliveira, A. B. Soliton
instability and fold formation in later-
ally compressed graphene. Nanotechnol-
ogy 2015, 26, 045707.
(125) Shankar, R.; Marchesini, S.; Petit, C.
Enhanced Hydrolytic Stability of Porous
Boron Nitride via the Control of Crys-
tallinity, Porosity, and Chemical Compo-
sition. Journal of Physical Chemistry C
2019, 123, 4282–4290.
23
(126) Kroes, J. M.; Fasolino, A.; Katsnel-
son, M. I. Density functional based simu-
lations of proton permeation of graphene
and hexagonal boron nitride. Physical
Chemistry Chemical Physics 2017, 19,
5813–5817.
(127) Liang, T.; He, G.; Wu, X.; Ren, J.;
Guo, H.; Kong, Y.; Iwai, H.; Fujita, D.;
Gao, H.; Guo, H. et al. Permeation
through graphene ripples. 2D Materials
2017, 4, 025010.
(128) Sun, P. Z.; Yang, Q.; Kuang, W. J.;
Stebunov, Y. V.; Xiong, W. Q.;
Yu, J.; Nair, R. R.; Katsnelson, M. I.;
Yuan, S. J.; Grigorieva, I. V. et al. Limits
on gas impermeability of graphene. Na-
ture 2020, 579, 229–232.
24
Graphical TOC Entry
25