AI in FinTech: A Research Agenda
Longbing Cao
University of Technology Sydney, Australia
Abstract—Smart FinTech has emerged as a new area that
synthesizes and transforms AI and finance, and broadly data
science, machine learning, economics, etc. Smart FinTech also
transforms and drives new economic and financial businesses,
services and systems, and plays an increasingly important role
in economy, technology and society transformation. This arti-
cle presents a highly summarized research overview of smart
FinTech, including FinTech businesses and challenges, various
FinTech-associated data and repositories, FinTech-driven busi-
ness decision and optimization, areas in smart FinTech, and
research methods and techniques for smart FinTech.
Keywords—AI, data science, machine learning, FinTech, fi-
nance, economics, AI in FinTech, AI in finance
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, finance has become increasingly interactive
with the new-generation artificial intelligence (AI) techniques
and data science (DS) [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. In particular,
FinTech (or Fintech, i.e., financial technology in full) [6], [7]
is at the epicentre of synthesizing, innovating and transforming
financial services, economy, technology, media, communica-
tion, and society broadly driven by AIDS techniques [8]. Here,
AIDS broadly refers to both classic AI areas including logic,
planning, knowledge representation, modeling, autonomous
systems, multiagent systems, expert system (ES), decision
support system (DSS), simulation, pattern recognition, im-
age processing, and natural language processing (NLP) and
modern AI and DS areas such as representation learning,
machine learning, optimization, statistical modeling, mathe-
matical modeling, data analytics, knowledge discovery, com-
plexity science, computational intelligence, event and behavior
analysis, social media/network analysis, and more recently
deep learning and cognitive computing. In contrast, we broadly
refer finance to areas including capital market, trading, bank-
ing, insurance, leading/loan, investment, wealth management,
risk management, marketing, compliance and regulation, pay-
ment, contract, auditing, accounting, financial infrastructure,
blockchain, financial operations, financial services, financial
security, and financial ethics. In addition, economics and
finance (EcoFin for short) are increasingly synergized with
each other and with AIDS.
AIDS is the keystone enabler of the new-generation of
EcoFin and FinTech [9], [10], [11], [12]. The new-generation
AIDS is reshaping or even redefining the concepts, objectives,
content and tasks of EcoFin and FinTech. AIDS essentially and
comprehensively transforms the way and effect that modern
economic and financial (economic-financial) businesses oper-
ate, transact, interact and collaborate with their participants
∗A comprehensive review on ‘AI in Finance: A Review’ can be provided
on request.
(incl. consumers, markets, and regulators) and environments.
AIDS nurtures new economic-financial mechanisms, models,
products, services, and many tangible and intangible opportu-
nities. As a result, AIDS not only strengthens the efficiency,
cost-effectiveness, customer experience, risk mitigation, regu-
lation, and security of existing economic-financial systems but
also innovates unprecedented and more intelligent, efficient,
convenient, personalized, explainable, secure and proactive
economic-financial products and services. In this paper, we call
the synthetic product of AIDS and EcoFin as smart FinTech.
Figure 1 presents a four-dimensional, systematic and inter-
active landscape of the synthesis between AIDS and EcoFin
to form smart FinTech. The landscape connects the main
EcoFin businesses (bottom) to the EcoFin data and reposi-
tories (left), the broad-based AIDS techniques (right), and the
EcoFin business objectives (top). In the rest of this paper,
we will discuss and summarize the main business domains,
technical areas, and techniques associated with smart FinTech
in terms of the FinTech businesses and challenges, FinTech
business objectives, FinTech data, areas in smart FinTech, and
AIDS techniques for smart FinTech. We will conclude with
opportunities for future smart FinTech developments.
II. FINTECH BUSINESSES AND CHALLENGES
The FinTech business areas that build on AIDS techniques
involve almost all aspects of an economic-financial system
and its environment and broadly all EcoFin businesses [1],
[12]. Here, we highlight the following major business areas
in smart FinTech: (1) economic-financial innovations: e.g.,
new mechanisms and products; (2) economic-financial mar-
kets: including products and services; (3) economic-financial
participants: including individual and retail investors, institu-
tions and regulators; (4) economic-financial behaviors: e.g.,
investor activities and company announcements; (5) economic-
financial events: e.g., company merger and financial crisis; (6)
economic-financial services: e.g., banking, insurance, lending,
financing, and crowdfunding services; (7) economic-financial
mechanisms: e.g., market mechanisms, business models, and
derivative pricing; (8) economic-financial systems: e.g., a
company’s finance; (9) economic-financial infrastructure: in-
cluding fundamental supporting systems and blockchain; (10)
economic-financial pricing: including the valuation of under-
lying and derivative assets in capital markets; (11) economic-
financial trading: including trading, investment, and execution;
(12) economic-financial payment: e.g., online, mobile and
contactless payment; (13) economic-financial valuation: e.g.,
the estimation of property value, credit and intangible assets;
(14) economic-financial marketing: including campaign, and
customer care; (15) economic-financial relationship manage-
ment: e.g., stakeholder relations, and business partnership;
ar
X
iv
:2
00
7.
12
68
1v
1 
 [
q-
fi
n.
G
N
] 
 1
0 
Ju
l 
20
20
Fig. 1. A Four-dimensional Research Landscape of the Synthesis between AIDS and EcoFin toward Fostering Smart FinTech. Shapes in different colors
represent distinct dimensions in the synthetic landscape. Each dimension initiates its interactions and communications with the three other dimensions through its
same-colored, directed connectors and channels. Each channel carries business, problem, data (incl. information and knowledge), intelligence, and technology,
etc. from one end to another. The four dimensions interact with each other to address specific economic-financial business problems of underlying businesses
by particular AIDS techniques on the corresponding data.
(16) economic-financial resource management: including man-
agement of human, material, informational and intangible
assets; (17) economic-financial operations: e.g., the processes
and services for supporting financial innovation, design and
production; (18) economic-financial compliance and regula-
tion: e.g., enforcing operational orders and business rules by
authorities; (19) economic-financial crisis, risk and security:
e.g., investment risk, systemic risk, and cybersecurity; and (20)
economic-financial ethics: including social and ethical issues
and privacy.
Major FinTech challenges associated with the above Fin-
Tech business areas as well as their associated EcoFin busi-
nesses, problems, data and objectives in Fig. 1 can be cat-
egorized into (1) innovation challenges: e.g., AIDS tech-
niques for inventing novel, efficient, intelligent and sustain-
able mechanisms, products, services and platforms; (2) busi-
ness complexities: such as AIDS techniques for representing,
learning and managing the intricate working mechanisms,
structures, interactions, relations, hierarchy, scale, dynamics,
anomaly, uncertainty, emergence and exceptions associated
with a market, a product or a participant; (3) organizational
and operational complexities: such as AIDS techniques for
understanding and managing the diversity and personalization
of individuals and departmental teams, the departmental and
institutional coherence and consensus, and the inconsistent
and volatile efficiency and performance; (4) human and social
complexities: such as AIDS techniques for modeling and
managing the diversity and inconsistency of participant’s cog-
nitive, emotional and technical capabilities and performance,
and for enabling effective communications, cooperation and
collaboration within a department and between stakeholders;
(5) environmental complexities: such as AIDS techniques for
modeling and managing the interactions with contextual and
environmental factors and systems and their influence on a
target business system and problem; (6) regional and global
challenges: such as understanding and managing the relations
between an economy entity and its financial systems with the
related regional and global counterparts and stakeholders and
their influence on a target problems; (7) data complexities:
such as extracting, representing, analyzing and managing data
quality issues, misinformation and complicated data charac-
teristics, e.g., uncertainty and extreme dimensionality, sparsity
and skewness; (8) dynamic complexities: such as modeling,
predicting and managing evolving but nonstationary behaviors,
events and activities of individual and block markets, products,
services and participants; and (9) integrative complexities: e.g.,
systematically modeling and managing the various aspects
of the above complexities that are often tightly and loosely
coupled with each other in an underlying economic-financial
system.
III. THE SYNTHETIC AREAS OF SMART FINTECH
Figure 2 summarizes the synergy between major AIDS
techniques and finance areas to generate various synthetic
smart FinTech areas. Our discussion focuses on AIDS tech-
niques for transforming the following smart FinTech areas
[12], [7]: smart banking, smart insurance, smart lending, smart
marketing, smart payment, smart regulation, smart risk, smart
security, smart trading, smart wealth, and smart blockchain,
in addition to the foundations for smart FinTech. Each of
these primary areas is further explained in terms of specific
problems and tasks where AIDS techniques can play distinct
and significant roles [3].
The foundations of smart FinTech refer to the AIDS
areas and techniques to enable smart FinTech. Examples
are actionable financial intelligence; AIDS for financial in-
frastructure; analyzing big economic-financial data; analyzing
cloud, online and mobile economic-financial services; ana-
lyzing environmental, social and governance data; analyz-
ing global economic-financial event and impact; analyzing
high-dimensional, sequential and evolving economic-financial
data; analyzing multisource, multimodal and heterogeneous
economic-financial data; automated economic-financial sys-
tems and services; computational intelligence for EcoFin; data
mining and knowledge discovery for EcoFin; deep learning
and representation for EcoFin; distributed learning, feder-
ated learning and transfer learning for EcoFin; intelligent
cross-market economic-financial data processing; intelligent
economic-financial recommendation; modeling economic in-
centives; modeling economic mechanisms and social wel-
fare; modeling evolutionary equilibrium of financial markets;
modeling economic-financial chaos, uncertainty and change;
modeling economic-financial couplings, interactions and de-
pendencies; modeling economic-financial information flow;
modeling economic-financial information propagation and in-
fluence; modeling financial market microstructure; modeling
economic-financial mechanisms, models, products and ser-
vices; modeling economic-financial networking and intercon-
nections; modeling economic-financial structures and hierar-
chy; modeling natural, online, socioeconomic, political and
cultural factors; personalized economic-financial recommen-
dation; reinforcement learning for EcoFin; and statistical and
mathematical learning for EcoFin.
The smart banking are active, personalized, automated,
trusted, robust, secure, risk-averse, and fragility-averse bank-
ing businesses and services. AIDS research for enabling smart
banking includes AIDS techniques for detecting, analyzing
and managing bank network risk and risk contagion; AIDS
for modeling, detecting and managing banking risk and fraud;
AIDS for conducting credit analysis and improving pricing;
AIDS for optimizing, validating and risk-managing credit
loans; AIDS for creating, mining, securing, risk-managing
and optimizing cryptocurrencies; AIDS for creating, securing,
evaluating, risk-managing and optimizing digital currencies;
AIDS for personalizing, automating, validating, securing, risk-
managing and optimizing Internet/online banking; AIDS for
enabling, personalizing, automating, securing, risk-managing
and optimizing open banking; AIDS for evaluating, securing
and risk-managing shadow banking; and AIDS for making
smarter and more automated, personalized, mobile and engag-
ing banking services; etc.
The smart insurance enables insurance businesses and ser-
vices that are proactive, tailored, trustful, resilient, secure and
risk-averse. The AIDS research for enabling smart insurance
includes AIDS for tailoring individual, business and commer-
cial insurance products and services; AIDS for insurance fraud
detection; AIDS for enabling personalized recommendation
of insurance products and services; AIDS for evaluating,
analyzing, detecting, managing and optimizing insurance risk
and compliance; AIDS for evaluating, automating, detecting
and optimizing insurance security; AIDS for creating novel
insurance models, products and services; AIDS for evaluating,
automating and improving insurance business operations; and
AIDS for integrating, recommending and optimizing multi-
policy, multi-product and cross-selling insurance products and
services; etc.
The smart lending supports lending businesses and services
that are efficient, risk-averse, personalized, context-oriented,
predictive, robust and secure. AIDS research directions for
smart leading cover problems and tasks such as AIDS for
addressing various aspects and problems of blockchain; AIDS
for automating crowdfunding, e.g., campaign design and strat-
egy optimization; AIDS for creating and optimizing distributed
ledger technologies; AIDS for fundraising, e.g., creating per-
sonalized recommendations, efficient fundraising models, and
intelligent services; AIDS for analyzing, detecting, managing
and mitigating lending risk and security; AIDS for enabling
smart, efficient and low-risk peer-to-peer lending; and AIDS
for creating, validating and optimizing smart contracts; etc.
The smart marketing offers marketing activities and ser-
vices that are cost-effective, relevant, proactive, personalized,
positive, sequential and context-oriented. AIDS-enabled smart
marketing involves many research areas, such as AIDS for
conducting consumer and client sentiment analysis; under-
standing consumer and client opinion and intention; AIDS for
evaluating and optimizing customer relationship management;
AIDS for validating, enhancing, synergizing and optimizing
econometrics; AIDS for evaluating, risk-managing, person-
alizing and optimizing stakeholder relationship; AIDS for
making, evaluating and optimizing financial recommendations;
and AIDS for enabling, automating, evaluating, securing, risk-
Fig. 2. The Synthesis between AI/DS Techniques and Financial Businesses to Form Smart FinTech. The upper fin refers to broad AI and DS areas and
techniques, the lower fin consists of major financial areas, and the ridge includes various synthetic areas of smart FinTech.
managing and optimizing supply chain finance; etc.
The smart payment includes online, mobile, wifi and
contactless payment methods and services that are secure,
risk-averse, fast and convenient. Smart payment becomes
increasing important in digital society and economy. AIDS-
enabled smart payment research include areas such as AIDS
for validating, automating, securing and risk-managing con-
tactless payment; AIDS for enabling, securing, risk-managing
and optimizing e-payment; AIDS for automating, securing,
risk-managing and optimizing Internet and online payment;
AIDS for automating, securing, risk-managing and optimizing
mobile payment; AIDS for modeling, detecting, analyzing and
mitigating payment risk; and AIDS for validating, detecting,
analyzing and mitigating payment security; etc.
The smart regulation supports automated or human-
machine-cooperative, risk-sensitive, proactive, systematic, dy-
namic and evidence-based regulation and compliance opera-
tions, governance and risk control. AIDS-empowered smart
regulation consists of many research topics, such as AIDS
for enhancing corporate finance transparency; AIDS for eval-
uating and optimizing corporate governance and regulation;
AIDS for making and optimizing cross-market regulation;
AIDS for creating and optimizing digital currency regulation;
AIDS for detecting, analyzing, risk-managing and managing
financial crime; AIDS for verifying, automating, securing and
optimizing financial digital authentication; AIDS for enabling,
validating, verifying, detecting, risk-managing and optimizing
financial digital identification; AIDS for quantifying, validat-
ing, monitoring, detecting, analyzing and mitigating financial
fragility, crisis and stability; AIDS for recognizing, detecting,
analyzing and mitigating financial fraud; AIDS for enabling
smarter and more efficient and personalized financial market
regulation, design and policy implication; AIDS for automat-
ing, evaluating and optimizing financial operations; AIDS for
quantifying, evaluating and managing information asymme-
try and transparency; AIDS for enabling, automating and
optimizing international regulation; AIDS for validating and
improving market legitimacy; AIDS for quantifying, verifying,
detecting, analyzing and improving market social justice; and
AIDS for quantifying, evaluating, automating and improving
marketplace trust and coordination; etc.
The smart risk and security offers whole-of-time, business
and customer risk and security management, which are pre-
dictive, systematic, evidence-based, and dynamic. AIDS can
play critical roles with many research tasks customizable for
specific economic-financial businesses, products and services.
Typical AIDS-enabled smart risk and security tasks include
AIDS for automating, evaluating and optimizing anti-money
laundering; AIDS for monitoring, detecting, categorizing, fac-
torizing, predicting and intervening client financial security,
retail investor risk, financial systematic risk, financial institu-
tional risk, financial network risk, and cross-market risk; AIDS
for detecting and quantifying financial risk factors and predict-
ing and evaluating financial risk factors and areas; AIDS for
quantifying, characterizing, evaluating, predicting and improv-
ing consumer confidence and sentiment, market reputation and
trust; AIDS for quantifying, analyzing, detecting, predicting
and mitigating financial crisis and crisis contagion; AIDS
for categorizing, monitoring, detecting, analyzing, predicting,
evaluating and managing financial event, market movement,
change, exception and emergence and their consequences
and impact; AIDS for modeling, detecting, evaluating and
managing financial system security, financial network security,
and financial instrument security; AIDS for characterizing,
quantifying, analyzing, evaluating, predicting and managing
financial system vulnerability; etc.
The smart trading supplies predictive, active, dynamic,
risk-averse, anti-fragility, and high-utility trading strategies
and services. Smart trading involves a very broad and widely
explored area. The AIDS-driven smart trading involves many
research topics, e.g., AIDS for making and optimizing al-
gorithmic trading, arbitrage trading, high frequency (cross-
market) trading, and institutional trading; AIDS for model-
ing, automating and optimizing digital asset pricing; AIDS
for enabling smart e-commerce; AIDS for enabling smart,
efficient, personalized and secure Internet finance; AIDS for
designing, automating and optimizing novel, secure, smart and
personalized financial mechanisms, financial models, financial
products, and financial services; AIDS for conducting portfolio
analytics and enabling smart portfolio management; AIDS
for predictive trading and strategic trading; AIDS for design-
ing, automating and optimizing trading strategies, algorithms
and platforms; AIDS for enabling and optimizing socially
responsible investment; AIDS for modeling, evaluating and
optimizing trading complementarity and substitutionary; and
AIDS for characterizing and improving trading incentive and
campaign; etc.
The smart wealth becomes increasing topical, with such
expected businesses and services for safe, secure, personal-
ized, anti-fragility, and automated wealth management. AIDS-
supported smart wealth involves many emergent research
areas, including AIDS for making, evaluating and optimizing
data monetization; AIDS for valuating, analyzing, evaluating,
optimizing and managing digital assets, Internet wealth, public
welfare, institutional welfare, and superannuation; AIDS for
enabling, automating, risk-managing and optimizing digital
financial advising; AIDS for designing and optimizing novel,
personalized, secure and healthy financing mechanisms; AIDS
for enabling, automating, evaluating and optimizing roboadvis-
ing; and AIDS for supporting secure, personalized, low-risk
and sustainable venture capital management; etc.
The smart blockchain enables efficient, secure, risk-
tolerant, automated or semi-automated, dynamic, and high-
performing blockchain infrastructures, computing and ser-
vices. Both classic and advanced AIDS techniques can play
critical roles in enabling smart blockchains. Examples are pre-
dicting the price movement of cryptocurrencies, constructing
risk-averse cryptocurrency trading strategies and portfolios,
detecting risk and assuring smart contracts, efficient mining
of bitcoins in distributed systems, supporting proactive and
systemic blockchain governance and regulation, and detecting
risk, intrusion and fragility in blockchain systems, behaviors
and activities, etc.
IV. AI TECHNIQUES FOR SMART FINTECH
The AIDS techniques required to achieve the aforemen-
tioned smart FinTech objectives and EcoFin businesses are
very broad and diversified. Each technique may play distinct
roles in addressing respective EcoFin business challenges and
data complexities. Here, we group the main AIDS techniques
for smart FinTech into the following technical families [13],
[14], [9], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [3], [21], [22],
[23], [24], [25]: (a) Mathematical and statistical modeling,(b)
Complex system methods,(c) Classic analysis and learning
methods,(d) Computational intelligence methods,(e) Modern
AIDS methods,(f) Hybrid AIDS methods.Table I summarizes
these AIDS techniques and their applications for smart Fin-
Tech.
A. Mathematical and Statistical Modeling
The family of mathematical and statistical modeling lays
the foundation for characterizing, formulating and modeling
economic-financial systems and their working mechanisms,
problems and solutions. Accordingly, here, we discuss four
areas that are widely used for analyzing economic-financial
systems and enable smart FinTech.
Numerical methods are used to build quantitative rep-
resentation and analysis of economic-financial systems and
problems, e.g., for value-at-risk (VaR), option valuation, option
pricing, portfolio simulation, portfolio optimisation, hedging,
and capital budgeting. Typical methods include linear and
nonlinear equations, least squares problems, interpolation,
optimization, binomial and trinomial methods, finite difference
methods, dependency modeling, financial simulation, Monte-
Carlo simulation, random number generators, and econometric
models such as term structure modelling and regression.
Time-series and signal analysis describe, characterize,
analyze and forecast the temporal movement, its transition,
regression, trend and change by treating economic-financial
indicators as time-series and signals. Time-series analysis and
signal processing are widely used in EcoFin. For example, the
signals of a security price and its derivative price and market
index and their relations can be analyzed by multivariate
regression and modeling high-frequency trading signals jointly
by time-domain sequence analysis and frequency-domain
wavelet. Typical methods include state space modeling, lin-
ear time-series analysis, nonlinear time-series analysis, time-
frequency and time-scale analysis, spectral analysis, Kalman
filter, fractional time-series analysis, long-memory time-series
analysis, seasonal time-series analysis, transfer function mod-
els, multiscale analysis, multivariate analysis, stationary anal-
ysis, nonstationary analysis, and outlier analysis.
Statistical learning methods measure, estimate and learn
the uncertainty, randomness, risk, pricing, rating, performance
or dependency of economic-financial systems, products and
problems in terms of probabilistic theories. Examples are
estimating the pricing of options, forecasting the VaR and
performance of a portfolio, modeling the sequential trading
behaviors of a group of investors or a firm by coupled
hidden Markov models, modeling the high-dimensional de-
pendency between multiple time series by a copula method,
and measuring the probabilistic relations between financial
indicators as a Bayesian network. Typical methods include ran-
dom walk models, efficient portfolio theories, factor models,
Black-Sholes models, Monte-Carlo methods, Delta-Gamma
approximation, Lévy processes, stochastic volatility models,
copula methods, filtering methods e.g. particle filters, and non-
parametric methods such as Bayesian networks and Markov
networks.
AIDS areas AIDS methods AIDS techniques Examples of smart FinTech applications
Mathematical
modeling
Numerical
methods
Linear and nonlinear equations, least square problem,
finite difference methods, dependence modeling, Monte-
Carlo simulation
Valuation, pricing, portfolio simulation, portfolio optimization, capital
budgeting, hedging, price movement prediction, risk modeling, and
trend forecasting.
Time-series and
signal analysis
State space modeling, time-series analysis, spectral
analysis, long-memory time-series analysis, nonstation-
ary analysis
Price prediction, trend forecasting, market movement prediction, IPO
prediction, equity-derivative correlation analysis, change detection, fi-
nancial crisis analysis, trading strategy discovery, and cross-market
analysis.
Statistical
learning
methods
Random walk models, factor models, stochastic volatil-
ity models, copula methods, nonparametric methods
Market trend forecasting, pricing, valuation, price estimation, VaR fore-
casting, financial variable dependency modeling, portfolio performance
estimate, and cross-market analysis.
Random meth-
ods
Random sampling, random walk models, random forest,
stochastic theory, fuzzy set theory, quantum mechanics
Abnormal behavior analysis, outlier detection, market event analysis,
market movement modeling, influence transition analysis, associated
account analysis, crowdsourcing modeling, and marketing modeling.
Complex
systems
Complexity sci-
ence
Systems theory, complex adaptive systems, chaos the-
ory, random fractal theory
System complexity modeling, market simulation, market mechanism
design, globalization analysis, crisis contagion, and market information
flow.
Game theory Zero-sum game, differential game, combinatorial game,
evolutionary game, Bayesian game
Interaction modeling, policy simulation and optimization, regional con-
flict modeling, mechanism testing, coalition formation, and cryptocur-
rency mechanism testing.
Agent-based
modeling
Multiagent systems, belief-desire-intention model, reac-
tive model, swarm intelligence, reinforcement learning
Testing economic hypotheses, simulating policies, supply/chain rela-
tion modeling and optimization, cooperation analysis, self-organization
modeling, portfolio optimization, and reinforcement learning.
Network
science
Linkage analysis, graph methods, power law, small
worlds, contagion theory
Modeling entity movement, community formation, interactions and link-
age, influence and contagion propagation; pool manipulation analysis,
and analyzing investor relations.
Classic
analytics and
learning
Pattern mining
methods
Frequent itemset mining, sequence analysis, combined
pattern mining, high-utility pattern mining, tree pattern,
network pattern, knot pattern, interactive pattern
Trading behavior analysis, abnormal trading analysis, outlier detection,
investor relation analysis, customer profiling, high-utility trading pattern
analysis, and cross-market trading behavior analysis.
Kernel learning
methods
Vector space kernel, tree kernel, support vector machine,
spectral kernel, Fisher kernel, nonlinear kernel, multi-
kernel methods
Price and market movement prediction, cross-market time series analy-
sis, financial crisis analysis, crowdfunding estimate, market dependency
modeling, and customer profiling and classification.
Event and be-
havior analysis
Sequence analysis, Markov chain process, high-impact
behavior, high-utility behavior, nonoccurring behavior
analysis
Financial event analysis, investor behavior analysis, price co-movement
prediction, abnormal behavior analysis, market exception and change
analysis, market event detection, and group behavior analysis.
Document anal-
ysis and NLP
Language models, case-based reasoning, statistical lan-
guage model, Bayesian model, latent Dirichlet alloca-
tion, Transformer, BERT
Financial event analysis, investor sentiment analysis, company valua-
tion, financial review and auditing analysis, misinformation and rumor
analysis, automated question-answering, and keyword searching.
Model-based
methods
Probabilistic graphical model, Bayesian networks,
expectation-maximization model, clustering, classifica-
tion, deep neural models
Hypothesis testing, customer clustering, price prediction, trend fore-
casting, index modeling, event analysis, fraud detection, movement
forecasting, valuation, and risk scoring and prediction.
Social media
analysis
Topic modeling, sentiment analysis, emotional analysis,
influence analysis, linkage analysis, interaction learning
Social influence analysis, investment linkage analysis, associated ac-
count analysis, sentiment analysis, influence modeling, market and price
movement, detecting manipulation and insider trading, and understand-
ing company branding and development.
Computational
intelligence
methods
Neural comput-
ing methods
Wavelet neural network, genetic neural network, recur-
rent neural network, deep neural network
Macroeconomic and microeconomic factor correlation analysis, val-
uation and pricing modeling, relation analysis, sequence modeling,
portfolio optimization, and trend and movement prediction.
Evolutionary
computing
methods
Ant algorithm, genetic programming, self-organizing
map, artificial immune system, swarm intelligence,
neural-genetic algorithm
New product simulation, financial objective optimization, portfolio
optimization, marketing strategy optimization, price and policy testing,
market risk analysis, and market performance optimization.
Fuzzy set meth-
ods
Fuzzy set theory, fuzzy logic, fuzzy neural network,
genetic fuzzy logic
Modeling market momentum, financial solvency analysis, risk and
capital cost modeling, and market uncertainty modeling.
Modern AIDS
methods
Representation
learning
Probabilistic model, graph network, network embed-
ding, tree model, neural embedding
Representation of stocks, assets, capital markets, portfolios, financial
events, behaviors, and financial reports.
Short and infor-
mal text analy-
sis
Conceptualization, term/tag/phrase similarity learning,
dependency parsing, word embedding, deep neural mod-
els
Text-based trend forecasting of price, market, sentiment and reputation,
question/answering modeling and recommendation.
Optimization
methods
Nonlinear, stochastic and dynamic programming, infor-
mation theory, Bayesian optimization
Optimizing policies, portfolios, trading strategies, VaR, and market
performance, cost-benefit optimization.
Reinforcement
learning
Bellman Equation, actor-critic model, Markov dynamic
progress, deep Q-network, adversarial reinforcement
learning
Simulating and optimizing supply/demand of new assets and services,
optimizing portfolios and trading strategies, option valuation optimiza-
tion.
Deep learning
methods
Convolutional neural network, attention network, gen-
erative adversarial network, autoencoder, deep Bayesian
network
Market modeling, behavior modeling, trading modeling, risk analysis,
price and movement prediction, financial event modeling, cross-market
analysis
Hybrid AIDS
methods
Parallel ensem-
ble
Evolutionary neural models, deep Bayesian model, cop-
ula graph neural network, combining complexity sci-
ence and game theory
Price and market movement forecasting, multi-aspect risk analysis,
macro/microeconomic factor analysis, financial event detection, cus-
tomer profiling, blockchain and cryptocurrency modeling.
Sequential and
hierarchical hy-
bridization
Time-series analysis plus classification,
macro/microeconomic dependency modeling, deep
sequential modeling-based event detection
Financial review-based fraud detection, macroeconomic influence on
market movement, social media impact on price movement, epidemic
evolution, and impact on index.
Cross-
disciplinary
hybridization
Deep multi-time series analysis, copula deep models,
autoregression deep model, behavioral economics and
finance
Psychological factor and irrational market behavior analysis, behavioral
finance, misinformation and mispricing on market inefficiency, financial
ethics modeling, interpretable financial modeling.
Behavioral eco-
nomics and fi-
nance
Prospect theory, nudge theory, natural experiment, ex-
perimental economics, behavior informatics, intention
learning, next-best action modeling
Modeling investment rationality, irrational behaviors, mispricing, market
efficiency, mental activities, decision-making process, intention, emo-
tion, and cognitive activities.
TABLE I
AIDS TECHNIQUES AND THEIR REPRESENTATIVE APPLICATIONS FOR SMART FINTECH.
Random methods characterize, model, simulate and an-
alyze an economic-financial problem in terms of theory of
randomness and uncertainty. For example, one can model
the evolution of abnormal and exceptional market behaviors,
global events, and black swan events by random methods. Typ-
ical random methods include random sampling, random walk
models, random forest, stochastic theory, fuzzy set theory, and
quantum mechanics.
B. Theories of Complex Systems
The theories of complex systems have been widely used
in classic AI-driven EcoFin research and applications. They
are powerful for understanding, simulating and analyzing the
working mechanisms, system characteristics and complexities,
and emergence and consequences of economic and financial
systems and problems. We introduce four of such methods
below.
Complexity science methods model an economic-financial
system (e.g., a bitcoin market) as a complex system. Then,
complexity science can understand its intrinsic and intricate
working mechanisms and system complexities, global econ-
omy and its evolution, inter-regional and inter-country rela-
tion analysis, migration, crisis contagion, conflict modeling,
international trading and information flow. Combined with
sociology and systems theory, typical methods include theories
of complexities, systems theory, emergence, self-organization,
complex adaptive systems, ABM, chaos theory, and random
fractal theory.
Game theory methods build mathematical and logic mod-
els to design, characterize, simulate and analyze the inter-
actions, conflict, cooperation, communication, coalition, un-
certainty, behavioral relations, social norm, reputation, trust,
Nash equilibrium, and consensus-building mechanisms and
processes in complex economic and financial systems. They
can be used to model the conflict between political systems,
estimate rational and irrational threats in regional conflict, and
model the market mechanisms of blockchain and cryptocur-
rencies by continuous game theories, to name a few. Typical
methods include zero-sum games, continuous games, differen-
tial games, combinatorial games, evolutionary games, stochas-
tic games, Bayesian games, strategic-form games, extensive-
form games, and the communication, bargaining, cooperation,
coalition in collective and cooperative games.
Agent-based modeling and simulation model and simulate
the working mechanisms, dynamic formation processes, in-
ternal interactions between entities (i.e., agents), and learning
and evolutionary processes of economic and financial systems.
ABM builds multiagent systems to simulate an economic-
financial problem as a complex system, and incorporates
such mechanisms as perception, interaction, policy selection,
rules, reinforcement learning and optimization to simulate the
working mechanisms in such systems. ABM has been widely
explored in economics and finance.
Network science characterizes, models, analyzes and pre-
dicts the directed and undirected connections and interac-
tions, entity movement, community formation and influence
propagation and contagion in economic-financial systems by
modeling such systems as complex networks. Typical methods
include network linkage analysis, graph methods, scale-free
and power law, small worlds, influence diffusion and contagion
theories and tools. Such methods can be used to model group
investor interactions, relations and communications as a di-
rected network, e.g., by Poisson factorization-based Bayesian
models or modeling the interactions between market partici-
pants in an economic market.
C. Classic Analytics and Learning Methods
Classic analytics and learning methods have played critical
roles in making EcoFin intelligent. This can be achieved by
analyzing economic-financial data, discovering the patterns,
clusters, classes, trends and outliers in economic-financial
systems. We categorize such methods into the following six
methods.
Pattern mining methods model and discover patterns and
patternable behaviors, structures and relations in economic-
financial systems. Examples are identifying arbitrage trading
behaviors by mining frequent and high-utility cross-market in-
vestment strategies, discovering high-frequency trading strate-
gies, and analyzing financial and social relations between
investors and firms. Typical methods include discovering fre-
quent patterns, sequential patterns, graph patterns, network
patterns, tree patterns, knot patterns, interactive patterns, and
combined patterns.
Kernel learning methods describe, represent and analyze
the distributions and numerical relations between economic-
financial indicators by individual or multiple (linear or non-
linear) kernel functions and their couplings. Typical methods
include linear and nonlinear kernels, vector (space) kernels,
tree kernels, sequence kernels, support vector machines, Fisher
kernels, spectrum kernels and multi-kernel learning. Such
methods can characterize the inter-dependency between micro-
market variables such as security price and volume and
between macro-economic indicators such as GDP values,
exchange rates, and gold prices by multi-distribution kernel
functions.
Event and behavior analysis characterize the occurrences,
driving forces, evolution and consequences of events, ac-
tivities and behaviors undertaken by or on an economic-
financial object, and detect and predict abnormal, unexpected
and changing events and behaviors. Examples are detect-
ing exceptional co-movement between an underlying equity,
derivative products, and the equity company’s announcement
releasing activities by coupling learning and coupled behavior
analysis of their activity sequences. Typical methods including
historical event analysis, sequence analysis, Markov chain
process, nonoccurring behavior analysis, high-impact behavior
analysis, high-utility behavior analysis, and group behavior
analysis.
Document analysis and NLP recognize, identify, ex-
tract, summarize, and classify sentiments, opinions, financial
events, and entities. They can support topic-oriented modeling,
sentiment-oriented analysis, searching, counting and compar-
ison of rule-violated, suspicious, malicious, fragile, decep-
tive and risky statements, claims, announcements, opinions,
sentiments or entities within and between economic-financial
documents, reports, and news. Examples are identifying and
comparing problematic descriptions, revenue and budget statis-
tics, misleading or misclassified reporting and review com-
ments across monthly financial review reports by Transformer
and BERT-derived neural models. Typical methods include
language models, named entity analysis, case-based reasoning,
sequence labeling, statistical language models, context-free
parsing, logical and dependency semantics, distributional and
distributed semantics, topic modeling such as latent Dirichlet
allocation, word embedding, Bayesian networks, and neural
models such as Transformer and BERT models.
Model-based methods characterize, represent and analyze
economic and financial problems in terms of given hypotheses
and models. Examples are modeling trading behaviors, mar-
ket movements, institutional trading, price and index trend,
and the influence of trader’s sentiment on the dynamics of
financial indicators. Typical models include numerical com-
putation models such as kernel functions, statistical models
such as probabilistic graphical models and Bayesian networks,
expectation-maximization models, the models for clustering,
classification and semi-supervised learning, deep reinforce-
ment learning (DRL) models, and deep neural models.
Social media analysis characterizes, detects, classifies,
clusters and predicts linkages, interactions, feedback, senti-
ment and networking behaviors between entities of economic-
financial systems. Such methods model economic-financial
systems as social networks by involving networking data from
relevant social media, mobile apps, and instant messaging
platforms to characterize, quantify and trace the sentiment and
opinion and their influence on a security price movement or
a market index movement by short text analysis and network
analysis. Typical methods include topic modeling, sentiment
analysis, emotional analysis, influence analysis, and modeling
linkage and interactions.
D. Computational Intelligence Methods
Computational intelligence methods model the working
mechanisms of economic-financial systems, investment analy-
sis, economic forecasting, portfolio analysis, and inflation pre-
diction, etc. Such methods are inspired by natural, biological
and evolutionary systems, and categorized into the following
three classes.
Neural computing methods model the relations, struc-
tures, sequential movements, transitions and influence between
economic-financial variables by neural networks (NN), in
particular, deep neural networks (DNN) nowadays. Examples
are modeling the coupled dependencies and dynamics between
a stock price movement and macroeconomic variables such as
petrol and gold prices by recurrent neural networks (RNN).
Typical methods include various artificial neural networks,
wavelet neural networks, genetic neural networks, fuzzy neural
networks, and DNN.
Evolutionary computing methods characterize, simulate,
analyze and optimize the working mechanisms, evolution,
interactions, variances, performance and risk of economic-
financial systems inspired by biological and evolutionary
models. Examples are simulating and optimizing the devel-
opment and evolution of a newly released financial product
in a market by a particle swarm organization (PSO) model,
and estimating and optimizing security price, market index,
exchange rate and inflation rate, and credit profiling. Typical
methods include ant algorithms, self-organizing map, genetic
computing/programming, artificial immune systems, gene ex-
pression programming, particle swarm optimization, swarm
intelligence, and neural-genetic algorithms.
Fuzzy set methods characterize the relationships, distribu-
tions and structures of economic-financial systems in terms
of fuzzy set and fuzzy system theories. Examples are model-
ing market momentum, capital cost, risk, financial solvency,
financial structures, and relations between costs on profit and
between financial structures and capital costs. Typical methods
include fuzzy set theories, fuzzy systems, fuzzy logic, fuzzy
neural networks, and genetic fuzzy logic models.
E. Modern AIDS Methods
Here, we discuss several categories of modern AIDS meth-
ods, which have been focused for the economic-financial
problem-solving in the recent decade or so. They are represen-
tation learning, short and informal text analysis, optimization,
reinforcement learning, and deep learning methods.
Representation learning methods describe, characterize
and model the intrinsic processes, interactions, relations, struc-
tures, distributions and characteristics of economic-financial
systems, products or problems. Examples include establish-
ing a probabilistic, mathematical, graph-based, network-based,
tree-like or neural representation of the assets, participants,
and role interactions in a derivative market, and representing
stocks by involving tick-by-tick data and external news and
social media data about the stocks. Typical methods include
probabilistic models, graph networks, network embedding, tree
models, neural embedding models, and adversarial learning
methods.
Short and informal text analysis collects, extracts, recog-
nizes, analyzes and classifies short text in social media, SMS
and instant messaging systems about economic-financial insti-
tutions, products, services, trends, news or participants. Such
information is alternative to core data available in markets
and economic-financial institutions, but consists of important
messages. It can be used for various purposes, e.g., predicting
the trend and movements of price, index and exchange rate,
extracting and representing keywords, phrases and expres-
sions in a social and virtual community about manipulating
a commodity price, and predicting the market sentiment,
reputation and confidence on a product or service. Typical
methods include explicit short text understanding such as con-
ceptualization for segmentation and labeling, term/tag/phrase
similarity learning, dependency parsing, syntax structure anal-
ysis, short text classification, query and recommendation; and
implicit short-text analysis, e.g., word/phrase/sentence em-
bedding, contextual embedding, short-text conversation (e.g.,
chatbot), question/answering by neural models such as long
short-term memory, attentive RNN, neural models with multi-
head attention, encoder-decoder, and variational autoencoder,
Transformer, etc.
Optimization methods model economic-financial problems
as optimization problems or apply optimization methods to
characterize and analyze optimal economic-financial solutions.
Examples include optimizing portfolio design and strategies
and return on investment w.r.t. relevant micro- and macro-level
financial indicators, optimizing the VaR of a cross-market port-
folio with transaction cost, and optimizing algorithmic trad-
ing strategies. Typical methods include linear programming,
nonlinear programming, quadratic programming, stochastic
programming, dynamic programming, multi-objective evolu-
tionary computing, swarm intelligence, information theory,
and Bayesian optimization.
Reinforcement learning methods model an economic-
financial system as a reinforcement learning problem by
optimizing actions, policies and rewards. Examples include
modeling the portfolio management of derivative products to
optimize the trading objectives, forecasting the price and trend
of foreign currencies, modeling property market supply and
demand, optimizing order routing in foreign exchange and
features markets, and optimizing trading agent actions, trading
behaviors, option valuation, and trading and asset manage-
ment. Typical methods include classic reinforcement learning
such as on policy learning, e.g., Bellman Equation, on-policy
actor-critic reinforcement learning and Markov dynamic pro-
cess reinforcement learning, and off policy learning e.g., Q-
learning and deterministic policy gradient. Recent focuses have
been on deep reforcement learning (DRL) for EcoFin problem
modeling, such as deep Q-network (DQN), double DQN, �-
greedy policy Q-learning, �-greedy policy double Q-learning
and weighted Q-learning, deep deterministic policy gradient,
hierarchical reinforcement learning, recurrent reinforcement
learning by integrating RNN with Q-learning, and adversarial
learning in reinforcement learning.
Deep learning methods represent financial variables and
their hidden relations and structures in economic-financial sys-
tems by multi-layer abstractions and hidden representations.
Deep learning can be used for stock representation, asset
representation, portfolio representation; modeling sequential
trading behaviors and strategies; modeling sequential trading;
predicting risk, profit and return of a portfolio; analyzing the
couplings, interactions and influence between macroeconomic
and microeconomic variables; detecting abnormal movements
and financial activities in markets and banking; discovering
incompliant behaviors and events in financial reports; un-
derstanding customer sentiment and feedback for marketing;
supporting smart crowdfunding and crowdsourcing; modeling
the influence of external events and news on market move-
ment; and analyzing and predicting the likelihood of financial
crisis, vulnerability, and cross-market influence. Typical deep
models including convolutional neural networks (CNN), RNN,
attention networks, memory networks, generative adversarial
networks (GAN), encoder-decoder, autoencoder, graph neural
networks (GNN), deep Bayesian networks and neural lan-
guage models (e.g., Transformer) can be used for the above
economic-financial purposes.
F. Hybrid AIDS Methods
Hybrid methods and ensemble methods model economic-
financial systems and problems by multiple complementary
AIDS techniques through their hybridization, ensembling or
synthesis. Such approaches are typically used to address (a)
single yet complex economic-financial problems that cannot
be well handled by single models; and (b) mixed problems
that require multiple methods. Accordingly, there are two main
directions of synergy. On one hand, the aforementioned AIDS
techniques may be selectively integrated in parallel, sequential
or hierarchical ways to enhance their capacity and ability.
Parallel hybridization, also called ensemble, integrates
multiple same or different models to address the underlying
problems. Examples include combining evolutionary comput-
ing and neural computing to generate evolutionary neural
models to simulate and analyze a capital market; integrating
complexity science and game theory to model and simulate
blockchain and cryptocurrencies; training a deep Bayesian
network composed of Bayesian dependency learning and hier-
archical networks; and learning a copula GNN handling both
dependency and connectivity.
Sequential and hierarchical hybridization integrates mul-
tiple methods sequentially or hierarchically to address underly-
ing problems. Examples are to model stock price relations by
time series analysis and then predict the abnormal movement
by a decision tree classifier; model the micro/macro-economic
variable dependency by a copula method and then forecast the
VaR by a time series model; hierarchically represent market
variables as input and then model the trading behaviors in a
market by a RNN before the prediction of market movement.
Parallel, sequential and hierarchical hybridization have been
widely explored in the relevant communities.
Cross-disciplinary hybridization integrates economic the-
ories and financial theories with AIDS methods, which has
been booming in recent years. Examples include migrating
multivariate time series to deep sequential models, combining
copula methods with deep neural models, integrating autore-
gression with DNN, learning high-utility behavior sequences,
training actionable trading agents and strategies for learning
trading history and satisfying portfolio optimization objectives
(e.g., VaR). This direction presents a more genuine yet chal-
lenging approach for addressing significant economic-financial
complexities.
Behavioral economics and finance is a typical area that
integrates multiple disciplines of thinking, theories and meth-
ods (e.g., psychology, neuroscience, applied behavior analysis,
and computational intelligence) to understand, interpret and
model the less rational to irrational investment, mispricing
behaviors, market inefficiency and market hiddenness that
drive market decisions and evolution. It migrates from the
hypothetical rationality, bounded rationality and efficiency and
transparency in classic economics and finance (i.e., System 1)
to the less rational and irrational human choices, market ineffi-
ciency (System 2) in real-life human decision-making. Typical
behavioral economics and finance methods include prospect
theory, nudge theory, natural experiments, and experimen-
tal economics. More advanced directions are to incorporate
AIDS-driven proactive, personalized, sequential, contextual,
online and dynamic modeling, analytics, simulation, learning
and optimization into behavioral economics and finance to
understand, analyze and interpret human cognitive emotion,
mental activities and intention, thinking, decision-making and
action-taking in markets and financial businesses.
V. CONCLUSIONS
This review briefs a comprehensive picture and promis-
ing potential of AI-enabled smart FinTech. The new gen-
eration of AI, in particular data science, machine learning
and deep learning, drives the era of data and intelligence-
driven economy and finance, where tremendous opportunities
emerge in transforming economic-financial theories, research
and practice and advancing AI for tackling real-life significant
economic-financial challenges and complexities and delivering
actionable intelligence-driven economy and finance.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported in part by Australian Research
Council Discovery Grant (DP190101079) and ARC Future
Fellow grant (FT190100734).
REFERENCES
[1] H. Arslanian and F. Fischer, The Future of Finance: The Impact of
FinTech, AI, and Crypto on Financial Services. Palgrave Macmillan,
2019.
[2] L. Cao, “Data science: challenges and directions,” Commun. ACM,
vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 59–68, 2017.
[3] Y. Hilpisch, Artificial Intelligence in Finance. O′Reilly, 2020.
[4] Y. Qi and J. Xiao, “Fintech: AI powers financial services to improve
people’s lives,” Commun. ACM, vol. 61, no. 11, pp. 65–69, 2018.
[5] L. Ryll, M. E. Barton, B. Z. Zhang, R. J. McWaters, E. Schizas, R. Hao,
K. Bear, M. Preziuso, E. Seger, R. Wardrop, P. R. Rau, P. Debata,
P. Rowan, N. Adams, M. Gray, and N. Yerolemou, “Transforming
paradigms: A global ai in financial services survey,” 2020.
[6] V. Dhar and R. M. Stein, “Fintech platforms and strategy,” Commun.
ACM, vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 32–35, 2017.
[7] B. Nicoletti, Future of FinTech. Palgrave Macmillan, 2017.
[8] L. Cao, G. Yuan, T. Leung, and W. Zhang, “Special issue on ai and
fintech: The challenge ahead,” IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 35, no. 2,
pp. 3–6, 2020.
[9] C. L. Dunis, P. W. Middleton, A. Karathanasopolous, and K. Theofilatos,
Artificial Intelligence in Financial Markets. Springer, 2019.
[10] International Telecommunication Union, “Assessing the economic im-
pact of artificial intelligence,” 2018, issue Paper No. 1, September 2018.
[11] B. Li and S. C. H. Hoi, “Online portfolio selection: A survey,” ACM
Comput. Surv., vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 1–36, 2014.
[12] T. Lynn, J. G. Mooney, P. Rosati, and M. Cummins, Disrupting finance:
Fintech and strategy in the 21st century. Palgrave Pivot, 2019.
[13] B. G. Buchanan, “Artificial intelligence in finance,” Tech. Rep., 2019.
[14] G. Cornuéjols, J. Peña, and R. Tütüncü, Optimization Methods in
Finance (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press, 2018.
[15] N. Ehrentreich, Agent-Based Modeling. Springer, 2008.
[16] J. E. Gentle, W. K. Hardle, and Y. Mori, Handbook of Computational
Finance. Springer, 2012.
[17] M. Gilli, D. Maringer, and E. Schumann, Numerical Methods and
Optimization in Finance. Academic Press, 2019.
[18] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. The MIT
Press, 2016.
[19] L. Hamill and N. Gilbert, Agent-Based Modelling in Economics. John
Wiley & Sons, 2016.
[20] J. B. Heaton, N. G. Polson, and J. H. Witte, “Deep learning for finance:
Deep portfolios,” Applied Stochastic Models in Business and Industry,
vol. 33, pp. 3–12, 2017.
[21] C. Kearney and S. Liu, “Textual sentiment in finance: A survey of
methods and models,” International Review of Financial Analysis,
vol. 33, pp. 171–185, 2013.
[22] B. Kovalerchuk and E. E. Vityaev, Data Mining in Finance: Advances
in relational and hybrid methods. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000.
[23] T. L. Meng and M. Khushi, “Reinforcement learning in financial
markets,” Data, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 110:1–17, 2019.
[24] G. Mitra and L. Mitra, The Handbook of News Analytics in Finance.
Wiley, 2012.
[25] A. M. Özbayoglu, M. U. Gudelek, and O. B. Sezer, “Deep learning for
financial applications : A survey,” CoRR, vol. abs/2002.05786, 2020.
	I Introduction
	II FinTech Businesses and Challenges
	III The Synthetic Areas of Smart FinTech
	IV AI Techniques for Smart FinTech
	IV-A Mathematical and Statistical Modeling
	IV-B Theories of Complex Systems
	IV-C Classic Analytics and Learning Methods
	IV-D Computational Intelligence Methods
	IV-E Modern AIDS Methods
	IV-F Hybrid AIDS Methods
	V Conclusions
	VI Acknowledgments
	References