Privacy vs National Security
International Journal of Computer Trends and Technology (IJCTT) – Volume 68 Issue 7 – July 2020 
 
ISSN: 2231-2803                                 http://www.ijcttjournal.org                                   Page 1 
Privacy vs National Security 
Tajdar Jawaid 
MS Cybersecurity, University of Dallas, TX, USA  
 
Abstract : There are growing concerns and anxiety 
about privacy among general public specially after 
the revelations of former NSA contractor and whistle-
blowers like Edward Snowden and others.  While 
privacy is the fundamental concept of being human, 
the growing tug-of-war between individual’s privacy 
and freedom vs national security has renewed the 
concerns of where the fine balance should lie 
between the two. For the first time in history the 
technological advancement has made the mass data 
gathering, analysis  and storage a financially and 
technologically feasible option for the governments 
and private businesses. This has led to the growing 
interest of governments and security agencies around 
the globe to develop sophisticated algorithms using 
the power of Big-Data, Machine-Learning and 
Artificial Intelligence. The technology has enabled 
governments and private businesses to collect and 
store thousands of data points on every individual, 
which has put individual’s privacy under constant 
threat. This article analyses the individual's privacy 
concepts and its perceived link with national security. 
The article will also discuss the various aspects of 
privacy and national-security, arguments of both 
sides and where a boundary should be drawn 
between privacy and national-security. 
 
Keywords: Privacy, Human Right, National 
Security, Terrorism, Counterterrorism, Profiling, 
Cataloguing, Personal Data,  Mass-Surveillance, 
Cybersecurity, Big-brother, Machine-Learning, Big-
Data, AI, FISA. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
There was a time when surveillance on anyone be 
it is an individual, organisation or enemy state was 
considered to be a very difficult, sophisticated, time 
and resource consuming operation. There were 
numerous laws, financial constraints, and 
technological hurdles. For instance if a surveillance is 
required on an individual the security or law 
enforcement agencies has to create proper 
justifications to get the necessary warrants and 
relevant court permissions, allocate massive 
resources, break-in into the premises of the target to 
install bugs for surveillance, physical spies are 
needed on targets to monitor and photograph all 
movements and interactions, wiretap phones, listen 
conversations, collect evidences and so on. All these 
constraints on one hand make the job of surveillance 
and intelligence gathering difficult, but on the other 
they ensure the greater privacy to the individuals and 
deter the governments and its agencies to initiate 
these activities without a justifiable cause. In past few 
years, the advancement in technology has made 
massive paradigm shift in surveillance. Technology 
has now made the intelligence gathering not only 
financially viable but very attractive options for 
governments around the globe. Since 9/11 and the 
resulting war on terror, there was a strong desire 
among the security and law-enforcement 
communities to find out ways to gather the 
intelligence at massive scale to avoid such incidents 
in future. This desire turns into a requirement of 
security and intelligence agencies that has given the 
birth of the concept of mass-surveillance. Mass-
surveillance programs has enabled governments and 
its intelligence agencies to monitor large set of 
population without their knowledge and consent.  
The rise of social-media, internet connected smart 
devices, IoT (internet of things) also have deep 
impact on individual's privacy. These concerns result 
in debates around what actually is considered to be a 
private information in this time and age. The next 
section will focus on what actually privacy is in 
current scenario, why it is important and why it is 
necessary to be protected. 
II. BACKGROUND ON WHY PRIVACY 
MATTERS 
Every human being has things which they wanted 
to keep very personal. It does not mean that it has be 
to something illicit, unlawful or criminal in nature. In 
fact, most of the time these are very innocent, totally 
harmless personal information in terms of religious, 
political or social views, some very personal choices, 
desires and feelings, sexual orientation, relationships, 
health related information and son on. Still 
individuals are not comfortable to share it with 
anyone, even to their closest ones. This is the actual 
essence of privacy, disclosing these kinds of 
information is a personal choice and a fundamental 
human right.  Privacy has been recognised as the 
fundamental human right under the United Nations 
declaration on Human rights (UDHR) article 12 [1], 
which states, "No one shall be subjected to arbitrary 
interference with his privacy, family, home or 
correspondence, nor to attacks upon his honour and 
reputation. Everyone has the right to the protection 
of the law against such interference or attacks.”, 
which was reaffirmed through the United Nation’s 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 
(ICCPR) article 17:1[2]. Accordingly, to the UN 
declaration and civil and political rights covenants 
the law should protect and provide appropriate 
http://www.ijcttjournal.org/
International Journal of Computer Trends and Technology (IJCTT) – Volume 68 Issue 7 – July 2020 
 
ISSN: 2231-2803                                 http://www.ijcttjournal.org                                   Page 2 
measures to ensure the protection of every 
individual’s privacy.  
 
Privacy ensures the individual’s right to the 
freedom of speech and expression, it protects from 
race/religious/political/sexual persecution, provided 
the right to freedom and choice to share or hide 
personal information from others. Privacy is a state of 
not being watched or disturbed without our 
knowledge and consent. Right to privacy ensures that 
we are free from state surveillance, free to have our 
own unique thoughts and views, free from being just 
a number, free from profiling and cataloguing based 
on various character traits, free to protest, free to vote, 
free to think, free be left alone and so on so forth. 
Privacy as some view is what keep us separate from 
zoo animals who are continuously being watched and 
filmed without their will and consent. Privacy is very 
basic human instinct and is recognised as a 
fundamental human right, it gives the confidence of 
being in-possession of our own personal information, 
thoughts, views and opinions without being judged. 
These basic concepts of privacy are now considered 
to be under threat as per organizations and 
movements like privacy international [3]. To protect 
this fundamental right there are multiple laws enacted 
which will be discussed in next section. 
III. PRIVACY LAWS AND REGULATIONS 
The privacy related issues and concerns in Europe 
goes back as far as 1970’s and 80’s, as government 
agencies and privates’ businesses started to collect 
and store customer data. As a result, in Europe 
common protection system implemented which was 
followed by EU Data Protection Directives in the 
1990s (directive 95/46/EC) [4]. The privacy concerns 
increase with the growing governments and private 
business interest in gathering and storing personal 
information. To address these concerns in Europe the 
EU Data Protection directives of 1990 is replaced by 
EU-GDPR (European Union General Data Protection 
Regulation) in 2016 [5]. 
  
In United States the fourth amendment considered 
to be basis of most privacy laws, which states that, 
"The right of the people to be secure in their persons, 
houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable 
searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no 
Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, 
supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly 
describing the place to be searched, and the persons 
or things to be seized"[6]. In US multiple federal and 
state specific laws were enacted to ensure the privacy 
rights of an individual. Some of these laws in U.S. 
are, Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act 
(COPPA) of 1998, The California Online Privacy 
Protection Act (CalOPPA), Electronic 
Communications Privacy Act (ECPA) of 1986, 
Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement 
Act (CALEA) of 1994, Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996, Health 
Information Technology for Economic and Clinical 
Health Act (HITECH) of 2009, Data Breach 
Notification Laws, Family Educational Rights and 
Privacy Act of 1974 and Identity Theft and 
Assumption Deterrence Act of 1998 are the few. 
These and other privacy related laws and regulations 
provided the required framework for governments 
and private organisations to implement stringent 
security to ensure the privacy of an individual. The 
control over privacy is getting weaker even though 
the privacy rights grown stronger. This is due to the 
fact that personal data are now much more exposed 
and easily available, which was not the case few 
years back.  
 
It is important to understand what constitute 
personal data and what comes under privacy. At very 
high-level any information that defines and uniquely 
identifies a person normally classified as personal 
data and should be protected by privacy laws and 
regulations.  This means in an ideal world any 
information falls under personal data should not be 
harvested without the knowledge and consent of the 
data subject. What comes under private personal data 
and falls under privacy right will be discussed in the 
next section. 
IV. WHAT ACTUALLY COMES UNDER 
PERSONAL DATA 
Technically anything considered to be private 
related to personal data which a person is not willing 
to share with the world. But according to European 
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) of 2016, 
the personal data means any information about a 
natural person (living person) which identify a 
natural person directly or indirectly, in particular by 
reference to an identifier such as a name, an 
identification number, location data, an online 
identifier or to one or more factors specific to the 
physical, physiological, genetic, mental, economic, 
cultural or social identity of that natural person. 
Together with this the article 9 of GDPR prohibits the 
processing of following categories of personal data 
e.g. race, ethnic origin, political opinions, religion, 
philosophical beliefs, trade union membership, 
genetic data, biometric data, health data, concerning a 
natural person's sex life, sexual orientation etc. 
without an explicit consent of data subject. The 
GPDR has provided a clear and concise definition of 
the personal data or PII data, for which organisations 
has to have legitimate business and lawful purposes 
and data subject consent to process and store. 
Whereas the article 12 to 17 of the GDPR gives 
multiple rights to data subject related with their 
personal data, such as right of access, right to be 
forgotten, right to restrict processing, right to data 
portability, right to object to processing [5].  
 
http://www.ijcttjournal.org/
International Journal of Computer Trends and Technology (IJCTT) – Volume 68 Issue 7 – July 2020 
 
ISSN: 2231-2803                                 http://www.ijcttjournal.org                                   Page 3 
In digital and internet context, the personal data 
includes but not limited to person's name, gender, 
race, beliefs, address, photographs, videos, friends 
and family members details, health related 
information, physiological information, biometrics, 
phone numbers, IP address, location data like GPS 
coordinates or Cell-ID locations, and so on. Any 
digital trace and information which uniquely 
identified a person is considered to fall under 
personal data [5].  
 
The next section will discuss the link between 
individual privacy with national security. 
V. THE INDIVIDUAL PRIVACY VS NATIONAL 
SECURITY  
 
In 1984 George Orwell wrote a novel called “Big-
Brother”. The basic premise of the novel was that 
every citizen will be continuously watched, listened, 
tracked, profiled and catalogued by the government. 
This fictional work has envisioned the environment 
where there was no concept of citizen's privacy at all 
[7]. In the aftermath of September 11, 2001, the 
United States government passes the USA Patriot Act 
on October 26, 2001 which has given new 
dimensions to the privacy of an individual by linking 
it to the national security [8]. This perceived link 
between national-security and citizen’s privacy trend 
has been followed by multiple governments around 
the globe. The United Kingdom has introduced one 
of its own bills in 2016 which gives immense powers 
of surveillance to its security agencies with the bill 
called Investigatory Powers Act [9]. These kind of 
counterterrorism laws has given the enhanced power 
to the security and intelligence agencies to allow 
surveillance by all possible means e.g. digital 
communication monitoring which includes (phones, 
emails, text messages etc.), investigating any suspect 
without tipping off, obtain business records, cross-
border information and intelligence sharing, obtain 
search warrant anywhere, monitor electronic 
trespassers, enhances the punishments etc. These 
laws aim to equip the intelligence and security 
agencies with the necessary tools to intercept and 
obstruct terrorism. These counterterrorism measures 
have result in several covert indiscriminate mass-
surveillance programs from governments around their 
citizens. However, the full extent of these programs 
and their invasiveness to citizens privacy first 
surfaced after the revelations made by former NSA 
whistle-blower.  
 
A. The Snowden’s Leaks: “A Case Study” 
The startling revelations by former NSA contractor 
like Edward J. Snowdon has raises a new and 
legitimate concerns around the privacy invasion in 
the name of national security. The scenario which 
was presented in Orwell's novel that a state act like 
"Big-Brother" by initiating the mass indiscriminate 
surveillance, tracking, profiling and cataloguing of its 
citizens seems to become a reality by Snowden's leak 
[10].  
 
The mass-indiscriminate Surveillance: The 
Snowden leaks raises the concerns over a mass-
indiscriminate surveillance of all citizen 
communication over the internet. This includes 
obtaining of all phone records, emails and text 
messages from service providers, all social-media 
posts, blogs and vlogs etc. The leaks also reveal that 
in many cases FISA process has been by-passed for 
the collection of citizen’s private information [10].  
 
Gather and Store all communication: The leaks also 
discuss the creation of big datacentres with virtually 
unlimited or expandable storage capacities. They are 
created to gather and store all digital communications 
over the internet for later analysis [10]. 
 
The Meta-Data: The government stance is that they 
only collect the meta-data about communication, 
which does not contain the actual communication 
itself. But Snowden suggest that it is not entirely true, 
there are programs which gather and store actual 
communications e.g. phone calls, emails, text 
message etc. [10].     
 
The Prism Program:  The Snowden's leak has 
revealed the details about the Prism Program. The 
prism program provides the most detailed search 
capability on any individual through the access on 
social media platform like Apple, Google, Amazon, 
Facebook, Twitter, etc. These social media platforms 
provided the real-time search API’s to NSA. These 
API’s then combined into a single search interface, 
which can pull all the information about any specific 
person on various search criteria from the servers of 
the above companies. This includes data from all 
social-media posts, connection details, friends and 
family details, emails, texts messages, photographs, 
internet searches in fact anything or everything stored 
on their platforms about an individual [10]. 
 
Zero-day Exploits (the backdoors): Zero-day 
exploits are unknown, bugs and backdoors. 
Sometime deliberately created specifically for 
surveillance purpose in mobile, desktops operating 
systems, applications and software. Through these 
zero-day exploits any internet connected device 
camera, mic can be remotely activated without the 
device owner/user noticing it or the mobile 
applications track gather and transport personal data 
like phone records, contact details, emails, text 
messages on the servers without ever being noticed. 
Through these exploits a person effectively can be 
watched or heard, tracked through their device’s GPS 
all without their knowledge and consent. Although all 
big names like Apple and Google are opposed to this 
request from security and intelligence agencies. But 
http://www.ijcttjournal.org/
International Journal of Computer Trends and Technology (IJCTT) – Volume 68 Issue 7 – July 2020 
 
ISSN: 2231-2803                                 http://www.ijcttjournal.org                                   Page 4 
according to Snowden's leak that was also a part of 
prism program [10].   
 
   B. A Problem without a clear Solution 
The terrorist incidents like 9/11 considered to be 
the failure of security and intelligence agencies. 
Incidents like this has been the primary motivation 
behind the laws like the USA Patriot Act and British 
government's Investigatory Powers Act. These kinds 
of laws indicate there is clear shift how governments 
see the privacy of their citizens. Privacy that once 
considered the basic human right is now on direct 
collision path with national security.  
 
The primary responsibility of any state is to protect 
the live and livelihood of their citizens, maintain law 
and order and protect its national infrastructure and 
interests. Therefore, in order to achieve these 
objectives, the security agencies have to equip with 
necessary tools and technologies supported by the 
law to gather the intelligence which will help prevent 
the repetition of incidents like September 11, 2001.  
 
There are also debates about the trade-offs 
between security and privacy. Too much privacy may 
hinder the ability of security agencies to gather 
required intelligence on targeted individuals. Also, 
too many prerequisites like gather evidence to obtain 
necessary court orders may put security at 
compromise. On the other hand, unlimited and 
unrestricted powers to invade citizen’s privacy by 
government agencies in the name of national-security 
may increase the risk of power misuse which 
increases the trust deficit between general-public and 
governments.    
 
This is still a debatable subject, as to what level of 
privacy invasion and compromises are acceptable to 
achieve security objectives. What kind of powers 
should be vested to intelligence communities to curb 
the next big attack. Are there any other 
counterterrorism alternatives and solutions which 
could give the required level of information to 
intelligence communities to ensure security without 
invading the privacy of the individuals. Should 
governments wait for any incident to be happened 
before they allow the security and intelligence 
agencies to be able to do the surveillance on the 
suspected individuals. An analysis of recent terror 
related incidents reveals that the majority of the 
suspected terrorist carried out the attacks are already 
known to the law-enforcement agencies, and in some 
instances the red-flags were already raised against 
them, still those individual successfully carried out 
the attacks [16]. This in itself raises questions around 
mass-surveillance programs effectiveness, their lack 
of ability to provide the actionable intelligence etc.  
These and many similar questions are part of the 
wider debate on this subject, without a clear-cut and 
agreeable solution to date.  
The Increase in terrorism: Since the war-on-terror 
started post 9/11, which resulted in various mass-
surveillance programs, the actual number of terrorism 
related incidents has been increased globally.  
 
 
Figure 1: University of Maryland (2020). Global 
Terrorism Database [14] 
Figure 1 of University of Maryland, Global 
Terrorism database shows record number of increases 
in global terrorism related incidents since 9/11 [14]. 
This is an indication that these programs are not as 
useful as it is perceived in the view of intelligence 
communities, at least not in their current shape and 
form to combat terrorism. 
 
The general-public trust and opposition: Since 
Snowden’s leaks the approval ratings from public has 
been decreased. In a survey in 2015 conducted by 
PEW research centre 52% Americans were concerned 
about government surveillance of Americans 
personal data and communication [15].  
 
 
Figure 2: PEW Research Jan 15-19, 2014 [15]. 
The PEW research in 2014 shows that post-Snowden 
the opposition to government surveillance has 
increased [15]. 
 
C. The False Trade-off between Privacy vs. 
National Security 
There is a general perspective that there are trade-
offs between privacy and security. However, these 
perspectives often based on arguments which are not 
fully supported by substantial facts and figures.  
http://www.ijcttjournal.org/
International Journal of Computer Trends and Technology (IJCTT) – Volume 68 Issue 7 – July 2020 
 
ISSN: 2231-2803                                 http://www.ijcttjournal.org                                   Page 5 
 
Good People vs Bad People View: There are views 
that sometimes enforces by the influencers like the 
technology giant Google, its CEO Eric Schmidt once 
said "If you have something you don’t want anyone to 
know, May be you shouldn’t be doing it" [11]. This 
particular mentality shows that the privacy is a 
concern for only bad people, who are doing bad 
things e.g. involved in criminal activities, terrorism 
etc. They completely ignore the importance of 
privacy or the fact that the privacy is not about being 
good or bad, but a basic human right.  
 
Nothing to hide, Nothing to Fear: This is again on 
the similar lines of good and bad people view. This 
view again argues that essentially the reason to hide 
personal data from government is because of the fear 
of something wrong in it. Again, people with these 
views completely ignores what the privacy actually 
means [12].  
 
The cost of Security is Privacy: If the next 9/11 can 
be avoided by giving up my privacy, I am up for it. 
Again, the cost of security does not have to be paid 
by giving up the fundamental human right to privacy.  
 
    
Figure 1: PEW Research Centre Aug 17-21, 2011 
[15] 
     
Pew research in 2011 on the tenth anniversary of 9/11 
reveals that 54% Americans were not in favour of 
giving up civil liberties as a method to curb terrorism 
[15].  
 
The next section will discuss where the possible 
boundary can be drawn between Privacy vs National 
Security. 
 
VI. PRIVACY VS. NATIONAL SECURITY, 
WHERE SHOULD BE THE BOUNDARY?  
 
There may be trade-offs between national security 
and privacy, but they should be based on the facts 
and figures. There should not be a complete blind eye 
by governments on the powers vested to its security 
agencies in the name of national security. There 
should be a proper system of check and balances 
needed to be developed supported by the law in order 
to avoid the misuse these powers.  
 
The Internet and Digital Communication: After 
September 11, the NSA has initiated a domestic 
surveillance program known as “President’s 
Surveillance Program”. The program enforces all 
communication and internet service providers to 
provide all communication and call detail records of 
all their customers. NSA also recorded the emails of 
all customers of these telecommunication providers 
[13]. This trend has been followed by multiple 
governments around the globe. In fact, these internet 
and telecom companies have developed search 
portals which are made available to the government 
agencies which can be used to search any 
communication details happened over their network 
in real-time. Again, this level of information access is 
key in intercepting, tracing and locating a suspect 
before they carry out their attacks. A proper 
government oversight is needed to address the 
privacy and misuse concerns.  
 
 The Encrypted Internet Communication: The 
security and intelligence agencies view the encrypted 
internet communication technologies as a hinderance 
in their work. Which in many cases may be a 
legitimate concern. The counter argument here is 
providing the cryptographic keys to agencies could 
make the whole internet communication unreliable 
and unsafe. The access to the cryptographic keys to 
government agencies could be a prime target for 
malicious hackers, put internet security on risk, 
compromise the human right to privacy and 
undermine the rule of law. These kinds of law 
enforcement access to encrypted communication 
should approached with caution [17].    
 
Video Surveillance: In today’s world close circuit tv 
and security cameras are installed in public and 
private place in all cities and towns, shops, bars, 
businesses, in buses, trains and every step of the way. 
Every movement of a person is recorded and watched. 
This video surveillance by definition is also an 
invasion in privacy, but it is an acceptable norm 
around the world. These video surveillance 
technologies are now increasingly used with 
biometric technologies such as facial recognition 
which can be used to profile, catalogue and identify 
an individual. These technologies are essential to 
provide security and deterrence but at the same time 
raises the concern over privacy invasion. The use of 
video surveillance technology when clubbed with 
biometrics such as facial recognition and related 
algorithms, should have a proper law oversight to 
avoid any misuse of these technologies.  
 
Big-Data Analytics, Machine-Learning and 
Artificial Intelligence: Big-data technologies has 
revolutionized the way data has been studied. Big 
data has enabled the systematic analysis of very large 
and complex datasets to extract the meaningful 
information through various algorithms. The 
http://www.ijcttjournal.org/
International Journal of Computer Trends and Technology (IJCTT) – Volume 68 Issue 7 – July 2020 
 
ISSN: 2231-2803                                 http://www.ijcttjournal.org                                   Page 6 
algorithms like pattern recognition and pattern 
matching, identify trends and associations among 
seemingly unrelated and very large and complex 
datasets. The intelligence and law enforcement 
agencies use big-data technologies and algorithms on 
the citizen personal data which they collected from 
different sources like internet communication service 
providers, social media platforms and various other 
means.  The big-data analytics together with 
Artificial Intelligence and Machine learning 
technologies, are used to improve the prediction on 
the human behaviour through the process called 
psychographic analysis. It is a known fact that 
majority of terrorists leaves digital traces while 
communicating, planning and interacting over the 
internet. These technologies can be used to study, 
analyse and predict the behaviour of these individuals 
in order to combat the terrorism and security threats. 
But at the same time a misuse of these technologies 
can have devasting impact like it was revealed in the 
Cambridge Analytica scandal. The scandal reveals 
how these technologies has been used to influence 
the whole election processes in various countries [18]. 
Further research are required to develop or refine the 
existing big-data algorithms to help intelligence 
agencies with the appropriate oversights to avoid 
unnecessary privacy invasion of citizens supported 
by the laws to curb the misuse of these technologies.      
 
Store everything for later analysis: As revealed in 
the Snowden case study the governments and private 
business to create big data centres with virtually 
unlimited data storage capabilities. This result in 
storing all internet communication for unlimited 
period of time, to be analysed later [10]. The blanket 
application of gathering and dumping everything by 
security agencies into these big datacentres should be 
scrutinized by governments and relevant watchdogs. 
There is always a risk if a malicious hacker gets their 
hands on any such datastores what level of havoc 
they can pose to individuals, corporations and 
governments.    
 
The FISA and Investigatory Powers Act: The U.S 
government has provided the lawful backing to the 
security agencies through Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Courts (FISA). The FISA courts in USA 
ensures that the security and law enforcement 
agencies can only do the surveillance on American 
citizens and permanent residence through a proper 
court orders when there is a probable cause or a 
legitimate security concern [19]. Similarly, in UK the 
Investigatory Powers Act gives the enhanced powers 
to the law-enforcement agencies to obtain 
communications and data about communications and 
other digital traces of an individual [9].   
 
Though the FISA courts in USA and Investigatory 
Power Courts in UK are enacted to justify every 
surveillance needs through probable cause. But 
according to Snowden's leaks the security agencies in 
majority if not in all cases completely bypass these 
processes [10][18], or these courts passes orders in 
favour of law-enforcement and security agencies 
without due scrutiny to ascertain the probable cause 
[19].  
 
While in some cases understandably the 
intelligence agencies may not have enough time at 
their disposal to go through the due process, but at 
the sometime a complete blind eye may compromise 
the privacy and may be counterproductive to achieve 
security objectives. Hence it is necessary that these 
legal and lawful processes must be refined, 
strengthen and properly enforced.   
 
 
 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
The national security and privacy are deeply 
interconnected topics. Though the technological 
advancement for the first time in history has enabled 
mass-surveillance a viable technological and 
financial option for governments, but it has also 
raised concerns over the right to privacy. As privacy 
awareness are increasing, the privacy laws and 
regulations are getting tougher, but the control over 
privacy is getting weaker. Privacy is the fundamental 
human right and must be protected. The debate 
between privacy and national security is complex as 
both sides have the compelling arguments.  There 
may be trade-offs between security and privacy, still 
a proper government oversight is necessary to avoid 
mass indiscriminate citizen surveillance and to put a 
proper check and balances over the powers given to 
the security and intelligence agencies.  
 
 
REFERENCES  
[1] (1948) The United Nations website, "Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR)", [Online]. 
Available: https://www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-
human-rights/ 
[2] (1966) The United Nations website. United Nations 
Treaties. "International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights (ICCPR)". [Online]. Available: 
https://treaties.un.org/doc/publication/unts/volume%20999/
volume-999-i-14668-english.pdf 
[3] The Privacy Insertional website. [Online]. Available: 
https://privacyinternational.org 
[4] (1995). The European Union website. Europa, Access to 
European Union Law. "Directive 95/46/EC of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 
1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the 
processing of personal data and on the free movement of 
such data". Official Journal of European Union L 281, 
23/11/1995 P.0031 - 0050. [Online]. Available: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A31995L0046 
[5] (2016). The European Union website. Europa, Access to 
European Union Law. "REGULATION (EU) 2016/679 OF 
THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE 
http://www.ijcttjournal.org/
International Journal of Computer Trends and Technology (IJCTT) – Volume 68 Issue 7 – July 2020 
 
ISSN: 2231-2803                                 http://www.ijcttjournal.org                                   Page 7 
COUNCIL, General Data Protection Regulation". Official 
Journal of European Union L 119/1, 27/04/2016. [Online]. 
Available: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=uriserv%3AOJ.L_.2016.119.01.000
1.01.ENG&toc=OJ%3AL%3A2016%3A119%3ATOC 
[6] The U.S. Congress website. Constitution Annotated, 
Analysis and Interpretation of the U.S. Constitution, 
“Fourth Amendment”. [Online]. Available: 
https://constitution.congress.gov/constitution/amendment-
4/ 
[7] George Orwell, “Nineteen Eigthy-Four”, Penguin Modern 
Classics, 2004.  
[8] The U.S. Department of Justice website. The USA Patriot 
Act: Preserving Life and Liberty. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.justice.gov/archive/ll/highlights.htm 
[9] (2015). The United Kingdom Home Office website. 
Investigatory Powers Act. Published 1
st
 March 2015. Home 
Office, United Kingdom. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/investigatory-
powers-bill 
[10] Luke Harding, “The Snowden Files”, Penguin Random 
House. 2014. 
[11] (2009). Electronic Frontier Foundation. “Google CEO Eric 
Schmidt Dismisses the Importance of Privacy”. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2009/12/google-
ceo-eric-schmidt-dismisses-privacy  
[12] Daniel J. Solove, “Nothing to Hide”. Yale University Press 
(2011). 
[13] (2014). Electronic Frontier Foundation, (2014). NSA 
Spying. [Online]. Available at: https://www.eff.org/nsa- 
spying. 
[14] (2020). University of Maryland. Global Terrorism 
Database. Incidents over time. [Online]. Available at: 
https://www.start.umd.edu/gtd/ 
[15] (2011). PEW Research Center. Civil liberties and anti-
terrorism policies. [Online]. Available at: 
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-
tank/2016/02/19/americans-feel-the-tensions-between-
privacy-and-security-concerns/ 
[16] (2018). Dr. Lorenzo Vidino, George Washington 
University. [Online]. Available at: 
https://extremism.gwu.edu/dr-lorenzo-vidino 
[17] (2015). Harold Abelson, Ross Anderson, Steven M. 
Bellovin, Josh Benaloh, Matt Blaze, Whitfield Diffie, John 
Gilmore, Matthew Green, Susan Landau, Peter G. 
Neumann, Ronald L. Rivest, Jeffrey I. Schiller, Bruce 
Schneier, Michael Specter, and Daniel J. Weitzner .“Keys 
Under Doormats: Mandating insecurity by requiring 
government access to all data and communications”. 
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 
Technical Report. [Online]. Available at: 
http://dspace.mit.edu/bitstream/handle/1721.1/97690/MIT-
CSAIL-TR-2015-026.pdf 
[18] (2018). Carole Cadawalladr, Emma Graham-Harrison. 
“Revealed: 50 million Facebook profiles harvested for 
Cambridge Analytica in major data breach”. The Guardian. 
[Online]. Available at: http://freestudio21.com/wp-
content/uploads/2018/04/50-million-fb-profiles-harvested-
by-cambridge-analitica.pdf 
[19] (2013). David Wright, Reinhard Kreissl. “European 
responses to the Snowden revelations: A discussion paper”. 
Increasing Resilience in Surveillance Societies (IRISS). 
[Online]. Available at: 
https://www.irks.at/assets/irks/Publikationen/Unterlagen/IR
ISS_European-responses-to-the-Snowden-revelations_18-
Dec-2013_Final.pdf          
http://www.ijcttjournal.org/