Briefings in Bioinformatics
doi.10.1093/bioinformatics/xxxxxx
Advance Access Publication Date: Day Month Year
Manuscript Category
Subject Section
Recent Advances in Network-based Methods for
Disease Gene Prediction
Sezin Kircali Ata 1, Min Wu 2, Yuan Fang 3, Le Ou-Yang 4, Chee Keong Kwoh 1
and Xiao-Li Li 2,∗
1School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 639798, Singapore
2Institute for Infocomm Research, 138632, Singapore
3School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, 188065, Singapore and
4College of Information Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China
∗To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Associate Editor: XXXXXXX
Received on XXXXX; revised on XXXXX; accepted on XXXXX
Abstract
Disease-gene association through Genome-wide association study (GWAS) is an arduous task for
researchers. Investigating single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that correlate with specific diseases
needs statistical analysis of associations, considering the huge number of possible disease mutations. The
most important drawback of GWAS analysis in addition to its high cost is the large number of false-positives.
Thus, researchers search for more evidence to cross-check their results through different sources. To
provide the researchers with alternative low-cost disease-gene association evidence, computational
approaches come into play. Since molecular networks are able to capture complex interplay among
molecules in diseases, they become one of the most extensively used data for disease-gene association
prediction. In this survey, we aim to provide a comprehensive and an up-to-date review of network-based
methods for disease gene prediction. We also conduct an empirical analysis on 14 state-of-the-art
methods. To summarize, we first elucidate the task definition for disease gene prediction. Secondly, we
categorize existing network-based efforts into network diffusion methods, traditional machine learning
methods with handcrafted graph features and graph representation learning methods. Thirdly, an empirical
analysis is conducted to evaluate the performance of the selected methods across seven diseases. We
also provide distinguishing findings about the discussed methods based on our empirical analysis. Finally,
we highlight potential research directions for future studies on disease gene prediction.
Key words: disease gene prediction; network-based methods; graph representation learning
Introduction
Genetic diseases are mostly caused by gene mutations, although recent
studies reveal that epigenetic factors can also play a role [1]. Among the
existing methods, linkage analysis and genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) are the most fundamental approaches in disease gene prediction,
as they can provide predictive biomarkers through the genetic variation
studies among humans, known as single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs). Nevertheless, statistical analysis and biological validation of the
biomarkers are costly and time consuming, as a large amount of false
positives need to be analyzed further [2]. Additionally, these techniques
are simply based on direct genotype-phenotype associations. However,
biological molecules perform their functions in corresponding pathways
in a collaborative fashion. Projecting and characterizing their specific roles
and collaborations onto a wired network/graph structure can reveal more
useful knowledge and provide more systematical aspects. Furthermore,
in a network-based environment, the disease causing factors, such as
genetic mutations, epigenetic factors and pathogens, can be tracked more
efficiently by chasing network perturbations, i.e., edge or node removals,
in the molecular networks [3]. Therefore, molecular networks are efficient
and effective data representations, which are able to model complex
interplay among the molecules through a wider viewpoint and track the
© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com 1
ar
X
iv
:2
00
7.
10
84
8v
1 
 [
q-
bi
o.
Q
M
] 
 1
9 
Ju
l 
20
20
2 Sezin Ata et al.
potential disruptions on the biological pathways due to the disease-causing
factors. As such, they have been extensively used by the computational
approaches to complement and enrich existing linkage analysis and GWAS
studies.
Currently, there are several molecular networks available to describe
relationships between genes, such as protein-protein interaction (PPI)
networks, gene regulatory networks, gene co-expression and metabolic
interaction (MI) networks. Among these networks, PPI networks are
the most extensively leveraged for disease-gene association prediction.
One key reason is that proteins perform a vast array of critical functions
to sustain an organism’s well-being. Some of these functions include
biochemical reactions, metabolic reaction catalysing, DNA replication,
transmission of signals between cells, and maintaining structure for cells
and tissues. More specifically, proteins collaborate and interact with each
other to perform biological functions, leading to many protein interactions,
which can be integrated and modelled as a graph/network data structure.
Given a protein interaction, a corresponding gene mutation from one of
the two proteins could make existing interaction impossible, and thus
loses certain important biological functions and causes diseases. Another
reason is, several studies using a PPI network embody the assumption
that the position of a protein is not random. Proteins associated with a
common set of biological properties tend to have common topological
properties in the network such as node degree and centrality [4, 5].
Therefore, PPI networks can be employed in revealing protein-disease
associations through the useful network-based features for proteins.
However, existing PPI networks are incomplete, i.e., only a fraction of real
protein interactions are detected through high-throughput experiments.
Likewise they are noisy due to biased experimental evidence towards much
studied disease genes [6]. Thus, an integrative approach covering various
aspects of proteins such as GWAS, gene-expression, gene ontology, and
other domain knowledge is both important and necessary.
In this survey, we focus on reviewing the computational methods
leveraging network/graph data for disease gene prediction. First, we
introduce the problem definition (i.e., node classification and link
prediction) for disease gene prediction with different types of graph inputs.
Second, we classify the network-based methods into three categories
and provide a brief introduction for these methods. Third, we select
representative methods from each category and conduct a comprehensive
empirical study on them. The three categories are listed in the following.
• Network diffusion methods. The diffusion methods employ random
walk techniques for influence propagation in different networks
(e.g., PPI networks or phenotype-gene networks) for disease gene
prediction.
• Machine learning methods with handcrafted graph features.
Various features for diseases and genes are first extracted from input
graph data, and then fed into traditional machine learning models (e.g.,
Random Forest) for predicting disease-gene associations.
• Graph representation learning methods. Instead of using
handcrafted features for disease gene prediction, graph representation
learning methods automatically learn the latent features or embeddings
for diseases and genes by matrix factorization, graph embedding and
graph neural network techniques.
Former surveys on network-based methods [3, 5, 7], which were
published about ten years ago, present pioneering endeavours on network
analysis and bring to light the importance of network data for disease
gene prediction. Nowadays, we witness the usefulness of incorporating
network data in several areas ranging from drug discovery to disease gene
identification through novel network-based algorithms. In this survey, we
aim to bring together up-to-date methods for disease gene prediction and
provide a wider perspective to this important problem. In addition, there
are two recent surveys which review the recent network embedding efforts
on biomedical networks [8, 9]. In [8], the authors present an overview of the
existing network embedding methods and their applications in biomedical
data science, e.g., pharmaceutical data analysis, multi-omics data analysis
and clinical data analysis. However, they do not conduct any empirical
evaluation for the introduced methods. In [9], the authors introduce the
recent graph embedding methods and their applications in biomedical
networks. In particular, they further select 11 graph embedding methods
and perform a systematic evaluation on 5 different tasks, i.e., drug-disease
association prediction, drug-drug interaction prediction, PPI prediction,
protein function prediction and medical term semantic type classification.
Yet, they do not touch the task on disease gene prediction and its various
state-of-the-art approaches. In this survey, we aim to conduct an empirical
analysis on disease gene prediction task using different methods from
the above three categories. Besides, we further apply and evaluate recent
graph embedding methods including heterogeneous network embedding
and multi-view network embedding for disease gene prediction.
The rest of this survey is organized as follows. In Section ‘Problem
Definition for Disease Gene Prediction’, we cast the task of disease gene
prediction as an instance of node classification or link prediction based on
different graph inputs. Then, we introduce various network-based disease-
gene prediction methods in details in Section ‘Network-based Methods
for Disease Gene Prediction’. Next, in Section ‘Empirical Comparison’,
we perform a comprehensive empirical evaluation for 14 representative
methods. Finally, in Section ‘Future Perspectives’, we discuss potential
future research directions in disease-gene association prediction problem
and we conclude this paper in Section ‘Conclusion’.
Problem Definition for Disease Gene Prediction
Network-based disease gene prediction leverages graph/network data as
inputs to predict disease-causing genes. In particular, different types of
graphs have been exploited for this purpose, including homogeneous
graphs, heterogeneous graphs and multi-view/multiplex graphs. A
homogeneous graph refers to a graph with a single type of nodes and
a single type of edges, while a heterogeneous graph contains different
types of nodes and edges. In addition, a multi-view or multiplex graph is a
collection of graphs with the same set of nodes and different types of edges
(e.g., edges from different views). Figure 1 shows the examples of different
types of graph inputs. PPI network in Figure 1(a) is a homogeneous graph,
while phenotype-gene network in Figure 1(b) is a heterogeneous graph.
Figure 1(c) shows a multi-view graph for proteins, containing three views
from the perspectives of PPI, GO similarity and gene expression.
Based on the above graph inputs, network-based disease gene
prediction can be treated as a node classification or link prediction task.
Node classification aims to infer the disease label of the unlabelled genes by
utilizing the known disease genes, whereas link prediction aims to predict
disease causing genes by utilizing gene-disease associations. Next, we
give a formal definition for these two tasks from the perspective of disease
gene prediction.
Node Classification
Figure 2(a) shows the node classification tasks, which is to predict the
label of the genes of which disease associations are unknown, given known
labels on some genes/nodes.
More formally, assume that we have a homogeneous graph G =
(V,E) where V is the set of nodes/genes and E shows relationships
between nodes. A subset of genes Vlabeled ⊂ V represents known
disease-causing genes, while Vunknown = V \ Vlabeled represents the
set of genes of which disease associations are unknown. The formulation of
node classification onG is to predict the labels for the nodes inVunknown.
Survey for disease gene prediction 3
(a) A homogeneous graph. (b) A heterogeneous graph. (c) A multi-view graph with three views.
Fig. 1: Different types of graph inputs for network-based methods: (a) homogeneous graph, (b) heterogeneous graph and (c) multi-view graph.
This node classification task in a heterogeneous graph or multi-view graphs
can be similarly defined.
Link Prediction
The link prediction is a common task to reveal relationships between the
objects especially in recommendation systems and social network analysis.
Given a network G, denoted as G = (V,E) and the nodes vi, vj ∈ V ,
the task of link prediction is to provide a measure of proximity/similarity
between the nodes vi and vj .
In particular, we consider a heterogeneous graph G = (U, V,E) for
gene-disease association prediction. The vertices are grouped into two sets
U andV , representing the set of genes and the set of diseases, respectively.
E includes the edges in U , the edges in V and the edges between U
and V (i.e., known disease-gene associations). The goal of gene-disease
association prediction is to predict unknown links between U and V .
Figure 2(b) shows the disease-gene association prediction in a
heterogeneous disease-gene network. The edges in black show the existing
associations between diseases and genes. Meanwhile, the dashed line
represents a potential association between the pair of g4 and d3, which is
to be predicted by computational methods.
(a) Node classification. (b) Link prediction.
Fig. 2: Tasks in disease gene prediction.
Network-based Methods for Disease Gene
Prediction
In this section, we present a comprehensive review of network-based
methods for disease gene prediction, namely diffusion-based methods,
traditional feature-based methods and graph representation learning
methods as illustrated in Figure 3.
Network Diffusion Methods
Diffusion-based methods working on biological networks are mostly
adopted from pioneer graph-based semi-supervised algorithms such as
[10–12]. In disease gene prediction problem, they are widely exploited in
the analysis of the biological pathways especially the pathways that are
closest to the known disease genes. Starting from known disease genes,
they diffuse along the biological network through random walks. Next, we
introduce diffusion methods by walking in different networks.
Random Walk in PPI Network
Random walk with restart (RWR) is the most extensively used algorithm
especially in prioritization of disease genes. Differently than a basic
random walk, it is able to jump back to any seed node with probability r
at each iteration. Formally, it is defined as follows:
pt+1 = (1− r)Wpt + rp0, (1)
where W is the column-wise normalized adjacency matrix of the
network. In particular, pt is the probability vector of being at node i at time
step t in its i-th entry and p0 is the initial probability vector holding the
probabilities of being at known disease nodes (seeds) [13]. Initially, each
known disease protein has a uniformly distributed probability as the sum
of the probabilities equal to 1. Total number of iterations is determined by
the condition which satisfies the L1 norm difference between pt and pt+1
smaller than a pre-defined threshold (e.g., 10−6).
PRINCE [14] adopts RWR to a weighted PPI network through a weight
function and also utilizes the disease similarities as prior probabilities. On
an unweighted PPI network, PRINCE basically performs random walk
with restart (Eq. 1) with adjusted prior probabilities based on the disease
similarity scores. VAVIEN [15] is proposed to measure the topological
similarity of proteins by formulating their interactions with Pearson
correlation coefficient as a topological profile. To compute this profile,
they employ the random walk proximity as a feature between seed and
candidate proteins, so that the proteins with similar interactions will have
a similar topological profile. Then, they prioritize the candidate disease
genes based on the topological profile scores. In [16], the authors introduce
a method called ORIENT, which prioritizes the candidate disease genes
with RWR. They perform RWR on the adjacency matrix where the weights
of interactions close to the known disease genes are properly reinforced
by computing the shortest path distance to the disease genes. In [17], the
authors propose a method called DP-LCC to construct diffusion profiles for
the disease genes and the candidate genes separately based on their RWR
on the PPI and the phenotype similarity network. Candidate genes are
prioritized according to their diffusion profile similarities with the query
disease. NPDE [18] utilizes non-disease essential proteins by formulating
a dual flow network propagation method to prioritize candidate disease
4 Sezin Ata et al.
Fig. 3: Pipelines for the categories in network-based studies for disease gene prediction.
genes. It uses the assumption that if non-disease essential proteins exist as
neighbors of a candidate protein, the protein is unlikely to cause a disease.
Eventually it formulates this assumption as the negative flow in the prior
information of the network propagation and the positive flow is allocated
for the disease proteins.
Random Walk in Heterogeneous Network
For diffusion methods in heterogeneous networks, we further divide them
into two categories with respect to their task as node classification or link
prediction.
We start with node classification methods. BioGraph, [19], is a
data integration and data mining platform. It utilizes stochastic model
of random walks with restarts for a given candidate gene prioritization
query as incorporating multiple data sources such as disease, pathway
and GO annotation. In [20], two methods, CrossRank and CrossRankStar,
formulate disease gene prioritization problem as optimization problems
based on network propagation. They model two types of networks, network
of networks (NoN) for CrossRank and networks of star networks (NoSN)
model for CrossRankStar and both models incorporate tissue specific
molecular networks. In SLN-SRW [21], the authors first aim to integrate
biomedical data from heterogeneous sources including multiple ontologies
and databases. For this propose, a simplified Laplacian normalization
based supervised random walk algorithm is employed to learn the edge
weights of the integrated network. RWR is then performed on this
integrated network for disease gene prediction.
Link prediction methods aim to predict disease-gene associations
in heterogeneous phenotype-gene network, where PPI network and
phenotype network are connected through known phenotype-gene
relationships. RWRH [22] aims to prioritize proteins based on their
relevance to disease proteins. Basically, RWRH extends RWR algorithm
to the heterogeneous phenotype-gene network through inter and intra
transitions between PPI network and phenotype network. It is performed
for a given query disease and corresponding disease genes are considered
as seed nodes. In [23], a RWRH-based method called RWPCN is
proposed to predict and prioritize disease genes on an integrated network
comprising human protein complexes, protein interaction network, and
phenotype similarity network. The basic difference from RWRH is that
RWPCN operate random walks in an additional protein-complex networks.
Likewise, a RWRH-based approach to predict malaria-associated genes
on an integrated network by integrating human-human, parasite-parasite
and human-parasite protein interactions in [24]. BiRW [25], aims to
capture circular bigraph patterns based on the assumption that the relation
among phenotype-gene associations can be characterized by these patterns.
For this purpose, they employ a bi-random walk algorithm and aim to
Table 1. Various network diffusion methods for disease gene prediction.
Categories Methods Method descriptions
RW in PPI network
(Node classification)
PRINCE [14] Network propagation on a PPI network.
VAVIEN [15] Random walk and correlation on a PPI network.
ORIENT [16] Neighbor-favoring RWR on a PPI network.
DP-LCC [17] RWR-based diffusion profiles based on PPI and phenotype similarity network.
NPDE [18] Network propagation with dual flow on a PPI network.
RW in heterogeneous network
(Node classification)
BioGraph [19] Stochastic RW on an integrated network containing 21 publicly available curated databases.
CrossRank [20] Optimization based on network propagation on a heterogeneous network with various aspects.
SLN-SRW [21] Supervised RW to learn edge weights of the integrated network and RWR for prediction.
RW in heterogeneous network
(Link prediction)
RWRH [22] RWR on a heterogeneous phenotype-gene network.
RWPCN [23] RWR on a heterogeneous network with phenotypes, genes and protein complexes.
RWRH-Malaria [24] RWR on cross-species PPI networks for human and parasite.
BiRW [25] RWR on a heterogeneous network with a phenotype, gene and the phenotype-gene associations.
RWRMH [26] RWR on a multiplex heterogeneous network of protein interactions and disease networks.
Survey for disease gene prediction 5
reconstruct the missing associations globally through the gene-disease
association prediction. In a recent study [26], the authors propose two
extensions of RWRH, which are RWRM and RWRMH. Former method
performs RWR on a multiplex network (i.e., all nodes are same type)
composed of three layers of networks containing PPI, co-expression
and pathway associations of proteins. Latter method incorporates a
disease-disease network based on phenotype similarities, and gene-disease
bipartite associations in addition to the aforementioned multiplex network
as multiplex-heterogeneous network so that the random walker can jump to
a network containing different sets of edges and nodes. Overall, a summary
of different diffusion-based methods is presented in Table 1.
Machine Learning Methods with Handcrafted Features
Supervised machine learning methods
Supervised machine learning methods employ features and/or kernels to
integrate various biological concepts, thus have been extensively studied in
disease gene prediction. In [27], DERanking is proposed to benchmark four
different strategies and prioritize candidate genes according to network
analysis of their differential expression. The reason of incorporating
differential expression as prior knowledge is based on the assumption
that the strong disease candidates tend to be surrounded by differentially
expressed neighbors. Three of the four benchmarking strategies are
distinct random walk-based strategies from exponential diffusion kernel
approach and one of them is direct neighborhood analysis. These strategies
are performed on four networks comprising functional or psychical
interactions of proteins for disease gene prediction. In [28], a method called
BRIDGE is introduced for prioritization of disease genes by integrating
various gene aspects including PPI, protein sequence data, gene expression
data, KEGG database and GO, through a weighting scheme. This scheme
is attained through a multiple linear regression model with lasso penalty,
which determines the phenotypic similarity between two diseases based on
the functional similarities between their associating genes. Accordingly,
the model is capable of identifying genes associated with the diseases
whose genetic bases are completely unknown. In [29], multiple aspects of
proteins including known gene-disease associations, protein complexes,
PPIs, pathways and gene expression profiles are integrated by Markov
random field (MRF) and Bayesian analysis for disease gene prioritization.
Initial prior probability of the MRF is set by Gibbs sampling. Metagraph
representations [30] are proposed for disease gene prediction, which utilize
both PPI network and biological annotations called keywords through
heterogeneous subgraphs. By counting the occurrences of proteins within a
specific subgraph type in terms of connectivity patterns, feature vectors of
proteins are constructed, so that the proteins, which are functionally similar
but located far away in a PPI network still have a chance to have similar
representations in case they co-occur within the same subgraph type. In
[31], the authors employ a multimodal deep belief net named dgMDL
to predict diseaseâŁ“gene associations for all known diseases instead of
predicting associated genes for a specific disease. This could alleviate the
risk of overfitting due to the small number of positives and a large number
of features in disease gene prediction problem. They first train two multi-
modal DBN, one on PPI network and the other on GO-based similarity
network, and then they train a final joint DBN for prediction based on the
outputs of the initial DBNs.
PU learning methods
Supervised models in disease gene prediction may suffer due to all
provided evidence serves as positive samples and the negative samples
remain unlabeled. Thus, positive-unlabeled (PU) methods arise to tackle
this problem. They are usually based on weighting the positive samples
and unlabeled samples to promote the prediction performance during the
learning. ProDiGe [32] is a PU learning method for prioritization of
candidate genes by enabling multiple data source integration such as PPI
network and phenotype similarities through multitask learning strategy. In
this way, scoring of the genes for prioritization is performed by considering
disease-gene pairs instead of the individual genes. PUDI [34] partitions
unlabeled set (i.e., negatives) into four sets namely, reliable negative set
RN, likely positive set LP, likely negative set LN and weak negative set
WN based on features extracted from PPI, GO terms and protein domain.
The weighted support vector machines are then used to build a multi-level
classifier based on these sets and positive training set. CATAPULT [35]
performs a biased SVM to classify gene-phenotype pairs on a combined
heterogeneous gene-trait network including gene-phenotype, gene-gene
interactions across multiple species. Features for SVM are derived from
walks in the network. EPU [36] is an ensemble-based PU learning method,
which integrates data from multiple biological sources for training PU
learning classifiers consists of weighted KNN, weighted naive Bayes
and multi-level support vector machine. It starts with individual label
propagation on gene expression network, PPI network and GO similarity
network. Then, the obtained gene weights are combined and fed into the
ensemble learner. PEGPUL [37] is an ensemble PU learning model to
combine a multi-level SVM, a weighted KNN and a weighted decision
tree for disease gene prediction. First, it extracts reliable negative genes
by utilizing a co-training algorithm. Then, it constructs a similarity graph
through metric learning by using PPI, protein domain and GO terms and
performs a multi-rank-walk on the constructed graph to propagate labels
prior to feeding the genes into the ensemble. A summary of supervised
methods and PU learning methods is presented in Table 2.
Graph representation learning methods
Recall that we need to manually extract various features for the methods
introduced in Table 2, which is tedious and requires domain knowledge.
Recently, graph representation learning methods [38, 39], which can
automatically learn the latent features/representations for the nodes, have
acclaimed wide attentions in bioinformatics and biomedical applications
Table 2. Machine learning methods with hand-crafted graph features for disease gene prediction.
Categories Methods Method descriptions
Supervised learning
DERanking [27] 4 ranking strategies based on whether a gene is surrounded by highly differentially expressed genes.
BRIDGE [28] A regression model with lasso penalty to weight 5 genomic data sources.
IMRF [29] An improved MRF method on multiple networks, e.g., PPI, pathways, protein complexes, etc.
Metagraph+ [30] Using metagraph features extracted from a heterogeneous network with PPI and gene keywords.
dgMDL [31] Multi-modal deep belief nets on PPI network and gene network based on GO similarities.
PU learning
ProDiGe [32] Biased SVM using features derived from multiple data sources [33] including PPI.
PUDI [34] Multi-level classification with biased SVM on features extracted from PPI, protein domain and GO.
CATAPULT [35] Biased SVM with features derived from walks in a heterogeneous phenotype-gene network.
EPU [36] Ensemble PU learning using various features derived from PPI and GO similarity networks.
PEGPUL [37] A perceptron ensemble of graph-based PU learning from 3 base classifiers SVM, KNN and CART.
6 Sezin Ata et al.
[8, 9]. In this section, we review graph representation learning methods
designed for disease gene prediction. In particular, we divide them into
four categories, namely, matrix factorization, graph embedding, graph
neural network and hybrid methods as shown in Figure 3.
Matrix factorization
Matrix factorization (MF) techniques have been widely used for link
prediction in bioinformatics, e.g., PPI prediction [40], drug-target
prediction [41, 42], miRNA-disease association prediction [43, 44], drug-
pathway association prediction [45], etc. Here, we introduce various MF
methods developed for disease-gene association prediction. Basically,
MF methods in gene-disease association prediction, such as inductive
matrix completion (IMC) [46], probability-based collaborative filtering
(PCFM) [47] and manifold learning [48], aim to learn the latent factors for
diseases and genes from the gene-disease association matrix. In addition,
they can also specify the factorization process by including additional
constraints into the objective function and thus MF techniques are useful
for revealing important associations between diseases and genes.
In [46], IMC constructs gene and disease features using different
sources including human geneâŁ“disease associations, gene-expression
from different tissue samples, functional interactions between genes,
geneâŁ“phenotype associations of other species, disease similarities
and disease-related textual data from OMIM database. Then, they
form the geneâŁ“disease association matrix using these features and
formulate an optimization problem to recover unknown low-rank matrix
using observations from the constructed associations matrix. Their
inductive approach is capable of making predictions for a query disease
with no previously known gene associations. In [47], PCFM exploits
the geneâŁ“gene, geneâŁ“disease relationships, gene-disease linkages
between orthologous genes and eight non-human species diseases and
diseaseâŁ“disease similarity associations. They propose two probability-
based collaborative filtering models, one with an average heterogeneous
regularization and another with personal heterogeneous regularization
using vector space similarity to predict gene-disease associations. The
advantage of PCFM than the collaborative filtering is that PCFM enables
probabilistic consideration in gene-disease associations instead of binary
evaluation. Manifold learning [48] uses gene-disease association data
for prediction and assumes that the geodetic distance between any
associated gene-disease pairs are shorter than non-associated gene-disease
pairs in a lower dimensional manifold. An optimization function is
defined based on this assumption and singular value decomposition
is employed to solve the optimization problem. Collage [49] applies
collective matrix factorization (CMF) to combine a wide range of 14 data
sets including RPKM-normalized RNA-seq transcriptional profiles and
phenotype ontology annotations. Then, it performs chaining on the learned
latent matrices to obtain gene profiles for prioritizing bacterial response
genes in Dictyostelium. Similarly, Medusa [50] also builds a collective
matrix factorization model for data fusion of a large-scale collections of
heterogeneous data and performs chaining on the learned latent matrices to
establish connections between non-neighboring nodes in the fusion graph.
It formulates the growing of the modules as a sub-modular optimization
program. The proposed method is capable of both associating genes with
diseases and detecting disease modules. In [51], an unsupervised learning
model based on matrix tri-factorization (tri-NMF) framework is proposed
to detect disease causing genes from pan-cancer data. In particular, it
exploits both the similarities of mutation profiles of different cancer
types and gene interaction network. A method called GeneHound [52]
adopts Bayesian probabilistic matrix factorization (BPMF) for disease
gene prioritization problem. GeneHound uses gene-disease associations
as partially observed data and a raw fusion is employed to integrate
multiple genomic data sources including literature-based phenotypic and
literature-based genomic information. Then, the Bayesian data fusion
model jointly learns gene and disease latent factors and corresponding gene
and disease-association matrices for disease-gene association prediction.
Graph embedding methods
Graph embedding methods learn low-dimensional and continuous vector
representations of nodes through a neural network. For example,
SkipGram [53] architecture is an extensively used architecture to construct
associations between the node and its neighborhood. The neighborhood
of the nodes is extracted through the random walks. Endeavours [54–56],
such as DeepWalk [55] and node2vec [54], generate node representations
such that the nodes lying within the short random walk distance have
similar embeddings. There are also several random-walk based embedding
methods proposed for disease gene prediction as follows.
SmuDGE [57] combines diseaseâŁ“phenotype and geneâŁ“phenotype
associations with interactions between genes to generate a corpus for
SkipGram-based representation learning. Then, it builds an artificial
neural network (ANN) to predict geneâŁ“disease associations. In [58],
HeteWalk builds a weighted heterogeneous network by joining six public
data sources including PPI, miRNA similarity network, and disease
phenotype similarity network and then performs SkipGram based network
embedding. It further applies meta-path selection to eliminate potential
redundant and misleading information caused by the heterogeneous
walks with multiple entities. HerGePred [59] also performs SkipGram-
based graph embedding on a heterogeneous network consisting of a
PPI, disease-protein associations, protein-GO associations, and gene-
disease associations. Eventually, HerGePred predicts novel disease-gene
associations in two different manners. It can directly calculate the cosine
similarity between the embedding vectors of the query disease and the
proteins. It can also perform random walk on disease-gene network,
which is reconstructed based on the calculated cosine similarities between
embeddings.
Graph neural networks
Graph neural network (GNN) is an advanced deep learning model for graph
data [69] and has been applied for various bioinformatics tasks [70–72].
Graph convolutional network (GCN), graph attention network (GAT) and
graph auto-encoder (GAE) are representative GNN models. For example,
GCN aims to learn node embeddings by implementing the convolution
operation on a graph based on the properties of neighborhood nodes. Here,
we will have a quick review on GNN models for disease gene prediction
as follows.
In [60], the authors introduce GCAS, which is an adaptation of
graph convolutional network for disease gene prioritization. First, they
construct a heterogeneous network consisting of ontological associations
as well as curated associations including genes, diseases and pathways
from multiple sources. They then perform direct spectral convolution to
successively propagate the influence to the neighborhood and infer novel
disease-gene associations. In [61], a graph convolutional network-based
disease gene prioritization method called PGCN exploits a heterogeneous
phenotype-gene network and the additional information for the nodes
(e.g., disease ontology similarity, gene expression data, etc) for disease
gene prioritization. In [62], the authors introduce the variational graph
auto-encoder (VGAE) for gene-disease association prediction in a
heterogeneous disease-gene network.
Hybrid methods
Here, we denote the methods, which combine the representation learning
methods with other techniques to derive features, as hybrid methods.
A number of methods combine graph embedding (e.g., node2vec) with
other methods for feature engineering. In [63], a method called N2VKO
Survey for disease gene prediction 7
Table 3. Graph representation learning methods for predicting disease-gene associations.
Categories Methods Method descriptions
Matrix factorization
IMC [46] Inductive matrix completion incorporating gene and disease features from multiple data sources.
PCFM [47] Probability-based collaborative filtering models with different regularization terms.
Collage [49] Collective matrix factorization using 14 datasets including genes, GO terms, KEGG pathways, etc.
Medusa [50] Collective matrix factorization on a data fusion graph with 16 data matrices.
Tri-NMF [51] Matrix tri-factorization on mutation profile similarities for different cancer types and PPI network.
GeneHound [52] Bayesian matrix factorization on OMIM associations with genomic and phenotypic data sources.
Graph embedding
SmuDGE [57] RW-based embedding and an ANN on pair of disease and gene feature vectors.
HeteWalk [58] RW-based embedding on a heterogeneous network with genes, miRNAs and diseases.
HerGePred [59] RW-based embedding on a heterogeneous network with diseases, symptoms, genes and GO terms.
Graph neural networks
GCAS [60] Graph convolution on heterogeneous association network for rare diseases (HANRD).
PGCN [61] GCN to learn the embeddings for phenotypes and genes in a disease-gene heterogeneous network.
VGAE [62] VGAE to learn embeddings for diseases and genes in disease-gene networks for gene prioritization.
Hybrid methods
N2VKO [63] Combines node2vec embeddings and handcrafted features.
N2A-SVM [64] Combines node2vec embeddings with an autoencoder on a PPI network.
N2Vmotif [65] High-order PPI structures combining node2vec embeddings and network motifs.
GCN-MF [66] Combines GCN with matrix factorization using both gene similarities and disease similarities.
HNEEM [67] An ensemble of 6 graph embedding methods in a disease-gene-chemical heterogeneous network.
DW-GCN [68] Integrates graph embedding (DeepWalk) and graph convolutional network.
integrates the node2vec embeddings extracted from PPI network with the
biological annotations for disease-gene association prediction. In [64], the
proposed method N2A-SVM employs node2vec embedding of the genes
from a PPI network and then performs dimension reduction with auto-
encoder to predict ParkinsonâŁ™s disease genes. In [65], the authors
propose to combine graphlet representations with node2vec embeddings
for disease gene prediction.
[66] builds a network-based framework for gene-disease association
prediction, which exploits disease similarity and gene similarity graphs to
construct two GCNs separately for diseases and genes. Then, GCNs are
trained by using corresponding disease and gene features and optimized
with label information with matrix factorization. In [67], the authors
propose a heterogeneous network embedding method, HNEEM, for gene-
disease association prediction by ensemble learning. The constructed
heterogeneous network consists of gene-disease associations, gene-
chemical associations ans disease-chemical associations. HNEEM first
extracts graph embeddings with six embedding methods and then feeds
these embeddings into a random forest classifier for disease gene
prediction. DW-GCN [68] is proposed to combine DeepWalk and GCN
for gene-disease association prediction on a heterogeneous disease-gene
network. Final predictions are derived using the output of a GCN
decoder and the probability distribution derived from DeepWalk. Table 3
summarizes various graph representation learning models for disease gene
prediction.
Empirical Comparison
In this section, we conduct experiments to evaluate the performance of
various network-based methods for disease gene prediction.
Experimental Setup
Datasets
We collect two networks for proteins, namely, a PPI network from the
IntAct database [73] and a protein functional similarity network based
on GO terms [74]. In particular, we first calculate the pairwise functional
similarity between proteins based on G-SESAME1 [75], and subsequently
build a graph using the K nearest neighbor (KNN) algorithm and we set
1 G-SESAME: http://bioinformatics.clemson.edu/G-SESAME/
K = 10 in all of our experiments. Overall, there are a total of 12,901 nodes
(i.e., proteins) in both networks, with 96,845 edges in the PPI network and
107,508 edges in protein functional similarity network.
There are several publicly available databases for gene-disease
associations as shown in Table 4. In our experiments, we acquired the
associations from the OMIM database. Given a specific disease/phenotype
(e.g., Alzheimer’s disease), we extract MIM IDs from OMIM Morbid
Map and retrieve their corresponding protein IDs from the Uniprot [76]
conversion tool. Each protein node is subsequently assigned a binary
label to represent whether it is a causative protein for this disease.
In our experiments, we focus on seven diseases, namely, Alzheimer’s
disease (11), breast cancer (24), colorectal cancer (34), diabetes mellitus
(37), obesity (19), lung cancer (15) and prostate cancer (17). Note
that the number of positive proteins for each disease is included in
the parentheses. The data and supplementary materials are available at
https://github.com/sezinata/SurveyDGP.
Table 4. Publicly available databases for gene-disease associations.
Name URL Latest Update
OMIM [77] https://omim.org July, 2020
DisGeNet [78] https://www.disgenet.org June, 2020
MalaCards [79] https://www.malacards.org March, 2020
COSMIC [80] https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk April, 2020
PsyGeNET [81] http://www.psygenet.org January, 2018
CTD [82] http://ctdbase.org July, 2020
Selected methods for evaluation
We select a subset of methods from different categories for evaluation. For
example, we select RWRH [22] from network diffusion methods and IMC
[46] from matrix factorization methods. For machine learning methods
with hand-crafted features, we select Metagraph+ [30] from supervised
methods, and Catapult [35] and ProDiGe [32] from PU learning methods.
Furthermore, we select a graph embedding method node2vec [54] and a
hybrid method N2VKO [63]. Table 5 shows the availability of the source
codes of these methods.
As aforementioned, disease gene prediction is a typical node
classification or link prediction task. Therefore, the state-of-the-art social
http://bioinformatics.clemson.edu/G-SESAME/
8 Sezin Ata et al.
Table 5. Selected methods for disease gene prediction and their source codes.
Methods Source Code Availability
IMC https://bigdata.oden.utexas.edu/project/gene-disease
Catapult http://www.marcottelab.org/index.php/Catapult
ProDiGe http://cbio.ensmp.fr/prodige
RWRH https://github.com/alberto-valdeolivas/RWR-MH
Metagraph+ https://github.com/sezinata/Metagraph
node2vec https://github.com/aditya-grover/node2vec
N2VKO https://github.com/sezinata/N2VKO
network analysis methods for node classification or link prediction can be
exploited for disease gene prediction. In our experiments, we also include
HIN2Vec [83], HeGAN [84], MVE [85], mvn2vec [86], DMNE [87] and
MANE [88] in our evaluation study. These methods are introduced as
follows and Table 6 shows the availability of their source codes.
• HIN2Vec [83]: A heterogeneous network embedding approach, which
samples heterogeneous paths called meta-paths and feeds them into a
neural network. We combined PPI network (PPI view) and functional
similarity network (GO view) to form a single heterogeneous graph,
where edges from different views are assigned to a different type of
relation.
• HeGAN [84]: A heterogeneous network embedding approach, which
utilizes the adversarial principle. We perform it on the constructed
single network as described in HIN2Vec.
• MVE [85]: A state-of-the-art multi-view network embedding
approach which maintain the collaboration between views by
regularizing the Euclidean norm between view-specific embeddings
and the final embeddings. The parameterη is used to control the weight
of regularization. Since we conduct our experiments on unsupervised
models, we adopt the unsupervised version.
• mvn2vec [86]: A state-of-the-art multi-view embedding approach.
There are two proposed versions. Since they both have similar
results we report only mvn2vec-r version which regularizes the
Euclidean norm between view-specific embeddings, controlled by a
hyperparameter γ. When γ is set to zero, it becomes equivalent to
node2vec performed on a single view.
• DMNE [87]: A multi-view network embedding algorithm which
is also capable of generating embeddings for many-to-many node
mappings across views. Note that in our dataset only one-to-one
mappings exist. We adopt their proximity disagreement formulation,
due to its flexible assumption and better empirical performance.
• MANE [88]: A random-walk sampling-based multi view embedding
algorithm, which unifies diversity, first-order collaboration and novel
second-order collaboration principles in a framework. There are
two hyperparameters α and β to regularize the contribution of the
principles.
The datasets that we utilize for the studied methods in this survey
are as follows. node2vec and RWR are simply performed on the PPI
network. In IMC, Catapult, ProDiGe and RWRH we use the PPI network,
phenotype similarity network [89] and the protein-phenotype associations.
Metagraph+ and N2VKO leverage the PPI network and protein-keyword
associations retrieved from Uniprot [76]. HIN2Vec, HeGAN, MVE,
mvn2vec-r, DMNE and MANE utilize GO and PPI networks described
in Datasets section. For methods using protein-phenotype associations,
we eliminate the test data associations to prevent data leakage.
All methods are performed using the implementations provided by
their respective authors unless stated otherwise, and we apply their
suggested parameter settings for the hyperparameters. For multi-view
graph embedding models (i.e., MVE, mvn2vec-r, DMNE and MANE) we
set walk length to 10, number of walks per node to 5, negative sampling size
to 10, windows size to 3 and random walk parameters of node2vec (p, q)
to 1. All methods haveD = 128 as the dimension of the final embedding.
Differently, for heterogeneous graph embedding model HIN2Vec we set
walk length to 30 and number of walks per node to 10. For graph embedding
methods (i.e., HIN2Vec, HeGAN, MVE, mvn2vec-r, DMNE and MANE),
the learned final embeddings are fed into the logistic regression model and
for all methods five-fold cross-validation is performed for training.
Table 6. Graph embedding methods proposed for social network analysis and
their availability.
Methods Source Code Availability
HIN2Vec https://github.com/csiesheep/hin2vec
HeGAN https://github.com/librahu/HeGAN
MVE https://github.com/mnqu/MVE
mvn2vec-r https://github.com/sezinata/mvn2vec-code
DMNE https://github.com/nijingchao/dmne
MANE https://github.com/sezinata/MANE
Results and Discussion
We demonstrate the performance comparison of 14 state-of-the-art
methods in Table 7 in terms of AUC. In particular, we group these
methods into three groups based on their input data for easy comparison,
namely homogeneous graph, heterogeneous graph and multi-view graph.
In addition, we also performed over-sampling with SMOTE [90] for the
network embedding methods. The oversampling results as well as the
comparison results in terms of ranking-aware metrics are provided in our
supplementary materials. Based on the results in Table 7, we can have the
following observations.
Firstly, we can observe that RWR and node2vec working on
a homogeneous PPI network achieve low performance as expected.
Therefore, we are motivated to integrate different data sources into a
heterogeneous network or multi-view network to improve the prediction
performance.
Secondly, various methods working on a heterogeneous network
perform well for disease gene prediction. ProDiGe and Catapult, as PU
learning methods, are very promising to address the imbalanced data
issue for disease gene prediction and both incorporate the phenotype
similarity network and phenotype-gene associations. In particular,
ProDiGe achieves an AUC of 0.7763 and is the second best performer
among these 14 methods. N2VKO and Metagraph+ first work on feature
extraction/selection in a PPI and keyword network, and then undergo
an oversampling procedure. Both of the methods achieve a decent
performance. Note that the random walk parameters of node2vec (p, q)
in N2VKO are not tuned to maintain consistency with random walk
sampling based embedding methods. Heterogeneous graph embedding
methods including HIN2Vec and HeGAN hinge on different principles and
perform very well. HIN2Vec utilizes random walks and negative sampling
with a neural network model, while HeGAN utilizes adversarial learning
principle in which a discriminator and a generator compete with each
other as in a mini-max game. In particular, HeGAN’s performance highly
depends on the used pre-trained embeddings as inputs and thus careful
initialization is critical in this model. RWRH also performs very well and
it is a good alternative to the network embeddings methods. However, its
performance depends on the tuning process, e.g., the setting of the restart
probability.
Lastly, multi-view methods are also robust and useful tools for
disease gene prediction. mvn2vec-r and MANE are two random walk-
based embedding methods employing Skip-gram for learning the final
http://www.marcottelab.org/index.php/Catapult
http://cbio.ensmp.fr/prodige
Survey for disease gene prediction 9
Table 7. AUC performance comparison among the benchmark methods.
Disease Alzheimer Breast Cancer Colon Cancer Diabetes Lung Cancer Obesity Prostate Cancer Avg
Homogeneous Network
RWR 0.7179 0.7606 0.6241 0.5446 0.4842 0.5056 0.5047 0.5917
node2vec 0.7539 0.8997 0.8370 0.5103 0.6004 0.5500 0.5888 0.6772
Heterogeneous Network
N2VKO 0.8724 0.8201 0.8469 0.7477 0.7135 0.6427 0.6474 0.7558
RWRH 0.8518 0.8857 0.9013 0.6138 0.7850 0.5544 0.5655 0.7368
IMC 0.6688 0.7598 0.6618 0.6145 0.7555 0.6221 0.8185 0.7001
Catapult 0.8241 0.8258 0.8748 0.6211 0.8431 0.6144 0.5762 0.7399
Prodige 0.9041 0.8997 0.8875 0.6525 0.7943 0.7856 0.5107 0.7763
Metagraph+ 0.8978 0.7725 0.8981 0.7335 0.6709 0.5999 0.6702 0.7490
HIN2Vec 0.7858 0.8775 0.9225 0.6995 0.7178 0.6850 0.6272 0.7593
HeGAN 0.8423 0.9199 0.9036 0.6677 0.7224 0.5765 0.5131 0.7351
Multi-view Network
MVE 0.6543 0.8330 0.8520 0.6305 0.5722 0.4078 0.5339 0.6405
mvn2vec-r 0.8756 0.9002 0.9187 0.6489 0.6482 0.6692 0.5088 0.7385
DMNE 0.9357 0.7996 0.8496 0.7526 0.7152 0.7256 0.4727 0.7501
MANE 0.9660 0.9276 0.9244 0.7157 0.6951 0.7339 0.6069 0.7956
embeddings, while DMNE utilizes a deep autoencoder in place of the
Skip-gram architecture and also employs RW-based sampling to feed
into the autoencoder. They can achieve relatively good performance in
terms of AUC. In particular, MANE introduces a novel second-order
collaboration and combines it with the previously studied principles in
a unified framework. Therefore, it has achieved the best performance
in average and outperforms ProDiGe and HIN2Vec by 2.5% and 4.8%,
respectively. Meanwhile, MVE is an attention-based supervised algorithm
and we employ its unsupervised version for a fair comparison in our
experiments. It is thus reasonable to achieve a relatively low performance
for MVE.
FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
In this section, we present possible future directions that may address
current challenging issues for more accurately predicting disease genes.
Learning with Limited Labeled Data
Learning with limited labelled data has been a challenging task in disease
gene prediction. Existing efforts to overcome this difficulty include PU
learning and oversampling techniques. For example, PU learning methods
[32, 35, 34] select likely-positive samples from the unlabeled data to
tackle the problem. Oversampling of minority class samples (e.g., SMOTE
[90]) is also a common strategy to address this challenge. However, both
strategies might need a tremendous tuning effort for difficult scenarios to
attain a satisfactory performance. Developing more efficient and accurate
models leveraging these strategies could be a promising direction.
Recently, generative adversarial networks (GAN) have been
successfully applied to augment the data for various tasks, e.g., image
classification [91, 92], speech recognition [93], etc. It is thus worth
investigating GAN-based techniques for disease gene prediction with
limited labels in the graph data. In addition, researchers also employ GAN
to boost the PU learning [94] and oversampling processes [95]. Therefore,
it would be very interesting to see the efforts that combine GAN with PU
learning or oversampling for disease gene prediction in the future.
Attention Mechanisms and Data Integration
Graph Attention Networks (GAT) [96], as extension of graph convolutional
networks, assign different weights to different neighbours with masked
self-attention layers. In particular, this self-attention operation enables
the model to focus on more important neighbours. Due to the
attention mechanism, GAT have been applied to generate accurate graph
embeddings for various tasks in recommendation systems [97, 98] and
bioinformatics [99]. Therefore, it is also promising to develop node-level
attention mechanisms for diseases and genes in different types of graph
inputs for network-based disease gene prediction.
Moreover, it is common to integrate different graph data sources
through multi-view techniques [100]. In these multi-view techniques, it is
important to reveal the contributions of each network to the final prediction
performance, so that it would be possible to prioritize the networks based
on their significance. Graph-level attention mechanisms [88] can be useful
in multi-view graphs for this purpose. In addition, hierarchical attention
mechanisms [101] can also be applied for disease gene prediction by
combining both node-level and graph-level attentions.
Sampling Strategies for Multi-View Inference
The study N2VKO [63] demonstrates that node2vec embeddings achieve
an inferior prediction performance on some diseases such as the obesity
and prostate cancer. The reason is that the disease-associated proteins
are scattered in the network with a greater hop-distance between them,
which limits the prediction power of a RW-based sampling method (e.g.,
node2vec). In these cases, it is good to develop models that can utilize
other structures in the network. Specifically, this problem can be tackled
by sampling strategies which may not consider only the local neighborhood
of a node in a network. For example, we can adopt a collaborative sampling
strategy, which can consider all the views of multi-view networks or utilize
the attributed nodes during the sampling procedure. It would thus minimize
the effect of local neighborhoods and help to increase the prediction
performance.
Single-cell Data
Recently, single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) techniques become popular
with the advancements in next-generation sequencing. Compared to
traditional bulk RNA-seq [102] analysis, they enable cell-level sequencing
to capture cell-to-cell heterogeneity. In particular, several methods have
been developed to infer gene relationships [103] and gene regulatory
networks [104] from single-cell gene expression data. Disease gene
prediction can thus benefit from such inferred gene relationships and gene
regulatory networks.
In addition, precise identification of cell states and types is crucial to
understand the disease related mechanisms so that the scientists can detect
correlated expression levels of genes across a homogeneous population of
cells [105]. Community detection algorithms such as louvain [106] and its
similar version leiden [107] are very popular tools to identify cell clusters.
10 Sezin Ata et al.
Furthermore, it is possible to model single-cell gene expression data as
graphs and we can thus employ graph embedding methods for cell type
identification through graph clustering [108].
Explainable Machine Learning Models
Decision trees, linear regressions and logistic regressions are commonly
used explainable machine learning models. The rise of the neural networks
and deep learning in many areas such as video, speech and text processing
comes with the need of explanation for the “black box” nature of these
models. As we know, it is very important for medical disease-related
predictions to provide information on why the model performs a certain
prediction. However, the graph representation learning methods covered in
this review are also lack of interpretability. We are thus highly motivated to
develop explainable machine learning models for disease gene prediction.
Recently, knowledge graphs (KG) have been integrated with user-
item graphs for accurate and explainable recommendation [98, 109]. A
recent work [110] adopts KG and graph neural networks for explainable
drug-drug interaction (DDI) prediction. Similarly, we can also construct
knowledge graphs for diseases and genes using various side information.
For example, we can obtain the medical KG with diseases, drugs
and symptoms, and gene ontology KG with genes and their functional
annotations. By integrating advanced graph neural network techniques
(e.g., GAT) and knowledge graphs, we expect to achieve accurate and
explainable predictions for novel disease-gene associations.
Conclusion
Discovering disease causing genes and analyzing their roles in the disease
are not only critical for understanding disease formation mechanism,
but also extremely important for designing appropriate drugs for
corresponding clinical therapies. Linkage analysis and genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) form the basis of disease gene prediction.
However, they generate a large number of false positives in their statistical
analysis of biomarkers. Computational approaches are efficient and
complementary tools to help biologists filter out noisy false positives
and provide a list of genes which are worth for further clinical study.
In this survey, we focus on network-based research, leveraging various
networks in their problem formulation for disease gene prediction. We
provide an organized, up-to-date overview of state-of-the-art network-
based approaches. We also perform an empirical comparison study on
different computational methods based on different graph inputs.
Generally, the methods in both heterogeneous network and multi-view
network perform very well for disease gene prediction. In particular, multi-
view methods with Skip-gram architecture can serve as robust and useful
tools, not only for disease gene prediction but also for visualization and
clustering purposes. Its low computational cost with a minimal tuning
necessity and high prediction performance, make it a good alternative to the
other learning methods. These techniques could be further investigated by
considering attention mechanisms or different network sampling strategies
instead of random walks. Moreover, for network-based disease gene
prediction analysis, constructing reliable networks is critical, so future
research need to focus on predicting novel interactions and removing
noisy interactions. The ultimate success of the disease gene prediction will
depend on the parallel improvements both in the experimental techniques
by biologists and clinicians to provide rich and reliable biological data sets
, and in the advanced computational techniques by computer scientists to
provide efficient and robust ways to discover novel knowledge and insights
from the biological data.
Key Points
• Uncovering disease-causing genes is a fundamental
objective of human genetics, while computational
prediction of disease-genes provides a low-cost
alternative.
• We classified and reviewed state-of-the-art network-
based approaches for disease gene prediction with
different types of graph inputs.
• We empirically evaluated various selected methods,
including some advanced methods for social network
analysis, for disease gene prediction.
• We also discussed possible future directions that may
address current challenging issues for more accurately
predicting disease genes.
References
[1] Fides Zenk, Eva Loeser, Rosaria Schiavo, Fabian Kilpert, Ozren
Bogdanović, and Nicola Iovino. Germ line–inherited h3k27me3
restricts enhancer function during maternal-to-zygotic transition.
Science, 357(6347):212–216, 2017.
[2] Sora Yoon et al. Efficient pathway enrichment and network
analysis of GWAS summary data using GSA-SNP2. Nucleic Acids
Research, 46(10):e60–e60, 03 2018.
[3] Xiujuan Wang, Natali Gulbahce, and Haiyuan Yu. Network-based
methods for human disease gene prediction. Briefings in Functional
Genomics, 10(5):280, 2011.
[4] Han-Yu Chuang, Eunjung Lee, Yu-Tsueng Liu, Doheon Lee,
and Trey Ideker. Network-based classification of breast cancer
metastasis. Molecular Systems Biology, 3(1):140–n/a, 2007.
[5] Trey Ideker and Roded Sharan. Protein networks in disease.
Genome Research, 18(4):644–652, 2008.
[6] Jörg Menche, Amitabh Sharma, Maksim Kitsak, Susan Dina
Ghiassian, Marc Vidal, Joseph Loscalzo, and Albert-László
Barabási. Uncovering disease-disease relationships through the
incomplete interactome. Science, 347(6224), 2015.
[7] Albert-László Barabási, Natali Gulbahce, and Joseph Loscalzo.
Network medicine: a network-based approach to human disease.
Nature reviews genetics, 12(1):56, 2011.
[8] Chang Su, Jie Tong, Yongjun Zhu, Peng Cui, and Fei Wang.
Network embedding in biomedical data science. Briefings in
Bioinformatics, 21(1):182–197, 12 2018.
[9] Xiang Yue, Zhen Wang, Jingong Huang, Srinivasan Parthasarathy,
Soheil Moosavinasab, Yungui Huang, Simon M Lin, Wen Zhang,
Ping Zhang, and Huan Sun. Graph embedding on biomedical
networks: methods, applications and evaluations. Bioinformatics,
36(4):1241–1251, 2020.
[10] Xiaojin Zhu, Zoubin Ghahramani, and John Lafferty. Semi-
supervised learning using gaussian fields and harmonic functions.
In Proceedings of the Twentieth International Conference on
International Conference on Machine Learning, ICMLâŁ™03,
page 912âŁ“919. AAAI Press, 2003.
[11] Hanghang Tong, Christos Faloutsos, and Jia-Yu Pan. Random walk
with restart: Fast solutions and applications. Knowl. Inf. Syst.,
14(3):327âŁ“346, March 2008.
[12] Dengyong Zhou, Olivier Bousquet, Thomas Navin Lal, Jason
Weston, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Learning with local and global
consistency. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPSâŁ™03, page
321âŁ“328, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2003. MIT Press.
Survey for disease gene prediction 11
[13] Sebastian Köhler, Sebastian Bauer, Denise Horn, and Peter N.
Robinson. Walking the interactome for prioritization of candidate
disease genes. The American Journal of Human Genetics,
82(4):949 – 958, 2008.
[14] Oron Vanunu, Oded Magger, Eytan Ruppin, Tomer Shlomi, and
Roded Sharan. Associating genes and protein complexes with
disease via network propagation. PLOS Computational Biology,
6(1):1–9, 01 2010.
[15] Sinan Erten, Gurkan Bebek, and Mehmet Koyutürk. Vavien:
An algorithm for prioritizing candidate disease genes based on
topological similarity of proteins in interaction networks. J Comput
Biol, 18(11):1561–1574, Nov 2011.
[16] Duc-Hau Le and Yung-Keun Kwon. Neighbor-favoring weight
reinforcement to improve random walk-based disease gene
prioritization. Computational Biology and Chemistry, 44:1 – 8,
2013.
[17] Jie Zhu, Yufang Qin, Taigang Liu, Jun Wang, and Xiaoqi
Zheng. Prioritization of candidate disease genes by topological
similarity between disease and protein diffusion profiles. BMC
Bioinformatics, 14(5):S5, 2013.
[18] Shunyao Wu, Fengjing Shao, Jun Ji, Rencheng Sun, Rizhuang
Dong, Yuanke Zhou, Shaojie Xu, Yi Sui, and Jianlong Hu. Network
propagation with dual flow for gene prioritization. PLOS ONE,
10(2):1–15, 02 2015.
[19] Anthony ML Liekens, Jeroen De Knijf, Walter Daelemans, Bart
Goethals, Peter De Rijk, and Jurgen Del-Favero. Biograph:
unsupervised biomedical knowledge discovery via automated
hypothesis generation. Genome Biology, 12(6):R57, 2011.
[20] Jingchao Ni, Mehmet Koyuturk, Hanghang Tong, Jonathan Haines,
Rong Xu, and Xiang Zhang. Disease gene prioritization by
integrating tissue-specific molecular networks using a robust multi-
network model. BMC Bioinformatics, 17(1):453, Nov 2016.
[21] Jiajie Peng, Kun Bai, Xuequn Shang, Guohua Wang, Hansheng
Xue, Shuilin Jin, Liang Cheng, Yadong Wang, and Jin Chen.
Predicting disease-related genes using integrated biomedical
networks. BMC Genomics, 18(1):1043, 2017.
[22] Yongjin Li and Jagdish C. Patra. Genome-wide inferring
geneâŁ“phenotype relationship by walking on the heterogeneous
network. Bioinformatics, 26(9):1219–1224, 2010.
[23] Peng Yang, Xiaoli Li, Min Wu, Chee-Keong Kwoh, and See-Kiong
Ng. Inferring gene-phenotype associations via global protein
complex network propagation. PLOS ONE, 6(7):1–11, 07 2011.
[24] Yang Chen and Rong Xu. Network-based gene prediction
for plasmodium falciparum malaria towards genetics-based drug
discovery. BMC Genomics, 16(7):S9, 2015.
[25] MaoQiang Xie, YingJie Xu, YaoGong Zhang, TaeHyun Hwang,
and Rui Kuang. Network-based phenome-genome association
prediction by bi-random walk. PLOS ONE, 10(5):1–18, 05 2015.
[26] Alberto Valdeolivas, Laurent Tichit, Claire Navarro, Sophie Perrin,
Gaelle Odelin, Nicolas Levy, Pierre Cau, Elisabeth Remy, and
Anais Baudot. Random walk with restart on multiplex and
heterogeneous biological networks. Bioinformatics, 35(3):497–
505, 07 2018.
[27] Daniela Nitsch, Joana P. Gonçalves, Fabian Ojeda, Bart
de Moor, and Yves Moreau. Candidate gene prioritization by
network analysis of differential expression using machine learning
approaches. BMC Bioinformatics, 11(1):460, 2010.
[28] Yong Chen, Xuebing Wu, and Rui Jiang. Integrating human
omics data to prioritize candidate genes. BMC Medical Genomics,
6(1):57, 2013.
[29] Bolin Chen, Jianxin Wang, Min Li, and Fang-Xiang Wu.
Identifying disease genes by integrating multiple data sources.
BMC Medical Genomics, 7(2):S2, 2014.
[30] Sezin Kircali Ata, Yuan Fang, Min Wu, Xiao-Li Li, and Xiaokui
Xiao. Disease gene classification with metagraph representations.
Methods, 131:83–92, 2017.
[31] Ping Luo, Yuanyuan Li, Li-Ping Tian, and Fang-Xiang Wu.
Enhancing the prediction of disease-gene associations with
multimodal deep learning. Bioinformatics, 35(19):3735–3742, 03
2019.
[32] Fantine Mordelet and Jean-Philippe Vert. Prodige: Prioritization of
disease genes with multitask machine learning from positive and
unlabeled examples. BMC Bioinformatics, 12(1):389, 2011.
[33] Tijl De Bie, Léon-Charles Tranchevent, Liesbeth MM
Van Oeffelen, and Yves Moreau. Kernel-based data fusion for
gene prioritization. Bioinformatics, 23(13):i125–i132, 2007.
[34] Peng Yang, Xiao-Li Li, Jian-Ping Mei, Chee-Keong Kwoh, and
See-Kiong Ng. Positive-unlabeled learning for disease gene
identification. Bioinformatics, 28(20):2640–2647, 08 2012.
[35] U. Martin Singh-Blom, Nagarajan Natarajan, Ambuj Tewari,
John O. Woods, Inderjit S. Dhillon, and Edward M. Marcotte.
Prediction and validation of gene-disease associations using
methods inspired by social network analyses. PLOS ONE,
8(5):1–17, 05 2013.
[36] Peng Yang, Xiaoli Li, Hon-Nian Chua, Chee-Keong Kwoh, and
See-Kiong Ng. Ensemble positive unlabeled learning for disease
gene identification. PloS one, 9(5), 2014.
[37] Gholam-Hossein Jowkar and Eghbal G Mansoori. Perceptron
ensemble of graph-based positive-unlabeled learning for disease
gene identification. Computational biology and chemistry, 64:263–
270, 2016.
[38] Peng Cui, Xiao Wang, Jian Pei, and Wenwu Zhu. A survey on
network embedding. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, 31(5):833–852, 2018.
[39] Hongyun Cai, Vincent W Zheng, and Kevin Chang. A
comprehensive survey of graph embedding: problems, techniques
and applications. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, 2018.
[40] Hua Wang, Heng Huang, Chris Ding, and Feiping Nie. Predicting
protein–protein interactions from multimodal biological data
sources via nonnegative matrix tri-factorization. Journal of
Computational Biology, 20(4):344–358, 2013.
[41] Yong Liu, Min Wu, Chunyan Miao, Peilin Zhao, and Xiao-Li
Li. Neighborhood regularized logistic matrix factorization for
drug-target interaction prediction. PLoS Computational Biology,
12(2):e1004760, 2016.
[42] Ali Ezzat, Peilin Zhao, Min Wu, Xiao-Li Li, and Chee-Keong
Kwoh. Drug-target interaction prediction with graph regularized
matrix factorization. IEEE/ACM transactions on computational
biology and bioinformatics, 14(3):646–656, 2016.
[43] Xing Chen, Lei Wang, Jia Qu, Na-Na Guan, and Jian-Qiang Li.
Predicting mirna–disease association based on inductive matrix
completion. Bioinformatics, 34(24):4256–4265, 2018.
[44] Zi-Chao Zhang, Xiao-Fei Zhang, Min Wu, Le Ou-Yang, Xing-
Ming Zhao, and Xiao-Li Li. A graph regularized generalized matrix
factorization model for predicting links in biomedical bipartite
networks. Bioinformatics, 36(11):3474–3481, 2020.
[45] Chun-Chun Wang, Yan Zhao, and Xing Chen. Drug-pathway
association prediction: from experimental results to computational
models. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 2020.
[46] Nagarajan Natarajan and Inderjit S. Dhillon. Inductive
matrix completion for predicting gene-disease associations.
Bioinformatics, 30(12):i60–i68, Jun 2014.
12 Sezin Ata et al.
[47] Xiangxiang Zeng, Ningxiang Ding, Alfonso Rodríguez-Patón, and
Quan Zou. Probability-based collaborative filtering model for
predicting gene–disease associations. BMC Medical Genomics,
10(5):76, Dec 2017.
[48] Ping Luo, Li-Ping Tian, Bolin Chen, Qianghua Xiao, and Fang-
Xiang Wu. Predicting gene-disease associations with manifold
learning. In Bioinformatics Research and Applications, pages 265–
271, Cham, 2018.
[49] Marinka Žitnik, Edward A Nam, Christopher Dinh, Adam Kuspa,
Gad Shaulsky, and Blaž Zupan. Gene prioritization by compressive
data fusion and chaining. PLoS Computational Biology, 11(10),
2015.
[50] Marinka Zitnik and Blaz Zupan. Jumping across biomedical
contexts using compressive data fusion. Bioinformatics (Oxford,
England), 32(12):i90–i100, 2016.
[51] Jianing Xi, Ao Li, and Minghui Wang. A novel unsupervised
learning model for detecting driver genes from pan-cancer
data through matrix tri-factorization framework with pairwise
similarities constraints. Neurocomputing, 296:64–73, 2018.
[52] Pooya Zakeri, Jaak Simm, Adam Arany, Sarah ElShal, and Yves
Moreau. Gene prioritization using bayesian matrix factorization
with genomic and phenotypic side information. Bioinformatics,
34(13):i447–i456, 2018.
[53] Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean.
Efficient estimation of word representations in vector space. In
ICLR, 2013.
[54] Aditya Grover and Jure Leskovec. node2vec: Scalable feature
learning for networks. KDD, 2016:855–864, Aug 2016.
[55] Bryan Perozzi, Rami Al-Rfou, and Steven Skiena. Deepwalk:
Online learning of social representations. In KDD, pages 701–710,
2014.
[56] Jian Tang, Meng Qu, Mingzhe Wang, Ming Zhang, Jun Yan, and
Qiaozhu Mei. Line: Large-scale information network embedding.
In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on World Wide
Web, pages 1067–1077, 2015.
[57] Mona Alshahrani and Robert Hoehndorf. Semantic disease
gene embeddings (smudge): phenotype-based disease gene
prioritization without phenotypes. Bioinformatics, 34(17):i901–
i907, 2018.
[58] Yun Xiong, Mengjie Guo, Lu Ruan, Xiangnan Kong, Chunlei Tang,
Yangyong Zhu, and Wei Wang. Heterogeneous network embedding
enabling accurate disease association predictions. BMC Medical
Genomics, 12(10):186, 2019.
[59] K. Yang, R. Wang, G. Liu, Z. Shu, N. Wang, R. Zhang, J. Yu,
J. Chen, X. Li, and X. Zhou. Hergepred: Heterogeneous network
embedding representation for disease gene prediction. IEEE
Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 23(4):1805–1815,
2019.
[60] Aditya Rao, Saipradeep VG, Thomas Joseph, Sujatha Kotte,
Naveen Sivadasan, and Rajgopal Srinivasan. Phenotype-driven
gene prioritization for rare diseases using graph convolution on
heterogeneous networks. BMC Medical Genomics, 11(1):57, Jul
2018.
[61] Yu Li, Hiroyuki Kuwahara, Peng Yang, Le Song, and Xin Gao.
Pgcn: Disease gene prioritization by disease and gene embedding
through graph convolutional neural networks. bioRxiv, page
532226, 2019.
[62] Vikash Singh and Pietro Lio. Towards probabilistic generative
models harnessing graph neural networks for disease-gene
prediction. ICML Workshop on Computational Biology, 2019.
[63] Sezin Kircali Ata, Le Ou-Yang, Yuan Fang, Chee-Keong
Kwoh, Min Wu, and Xiao-Li Li. Integrating node embeddings
and biological annotations for genes to predict disease-gene
associations. BMC Systems Biology, 12(9):138, 2018.
[64] Jiajie Peng, Jiaojiao Guan, and Xuequn Shang. Predicting
parkinson’s disease genes based on node2vec and autoencoder.
Frontiers in genetics, 10:226–226, Apr 2019.
[65] Monica Agrawal, Marinka Zitnik, and Jure Leskovec. Large-scale
analysis of disease pathways in the human interactome. Pac Symp
Biocomput, 23:111–122, 2018.
[66] Peng Han, Peng Yang, Peilin Zhao, Shuo Shang, Yong Liu,
Jiayu Zhou, Xin Gao, and Panos Kalnis. Gcn-mf: Disease-gene
association identification by graph convolutional networks and
matrix factorization. In KDD, pages 705–713, 2019.
[67] Xiaochan Wang, Yuchong Gong, Jing Yi, and Wen Zhang.
Predicting gene-disease associations from the heterogeneous
network using graph embedding. In BIBM, pages 504–511, 2019.
[68] Lvxing Zhu, Zhaolin Hong, and Haoran Zheng. Predicting gene-
disease associations via graph embedding and graph convolutional
networks. In BIBM, pages 382–389. IEEE, 2019.
[69] Zonghan Wu, Shirui Pan, Fengwen Chen, Guodong Long, Chengqi
Zhang, and S Yu Philip. A comprehensive survey on graph neural
networks. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
Systems, 2020.
[70] Mengying Sun, Sendong Zhao, Coryandar Gilvary, Olivier
Elemento, Jiayu Zhou, and Fei Wang. Graph convolutional
networks for computational drug development and discovery.
Briefings in Bioinformatics, 06 2019. bbz042.
[71] Ruichu Cai, Xuexin Chen, Yuan Fang, Min Wu, and Yuexing Hao.
Dual-dropout graph convolutional network for predicting synthetic
lethality in human cancers. Bioinformatics, 2020.
[72] Yahui Long, Min Wu, Chee Keong Kwoh, Jiawei Luo, and
Xiaoli Li. Predicting human microbe-drug associations via
graph convolutional network with conditional random field.
Bioinformatics, 2020.
[73] Sandra Orchard et al. The mintact project intact as a common
curation platform for 11 molecular interaction databases. Nucleic
acids research, 42(Database issue):D358–63, January 2014.
[74] Gene Ontology Consortium. Gene ontology consortium: going
forward. Nucleic Acids Research, 43(D1):D1049, 2015.
[75] James Z Wang, Zhidian Du, Rapeeporn Payattakool, Philip S
Yu, and Chin-Fu Chen. A new method to measure the semantic
similarity of go terms. Bioinformatics, 23(10):1274–1281, 2007.
[76] UniProt Consortium et al. Uniprot: a hub for protein information.
Nucleic acids research, page gku989, 2014.
[77] Joanna S Amberger, Carol A Bocchini, Alan F Scott, and Ada
Hamosh. OMIM.org: leveraging knowledge across phenotype-
gene relationships. Nucleic Acids Research, 47(D1):D1038–
D1043, 11 2018.
[78] Janet Piñero, Àlex Bravo, Núria Queralt-Rosinach, Alba Gutiérrez-
Sacristán, Jordi Deu-Pons, Emilio Centeno, Javier García-García,
Ferran Sanz, and Laura I Furlong. Disgenet: a comprehensive
platform integrating information on human disease-associated
genes and variants. Nucleic acids research, 2016.
[79] Noa Rappaport, Michal Twik, Inbar Plaschkes, Ron Nudel, Tsippi
Iny Stein, Jacob Levitt, Moran Gershoni, C. Paul Morrey, Marilyn
Safran, and Doron Lancet. MalaCards: an amalgamated human
disease compendium with diverse clinical and genetic annotation
and structured search. Nucleic Acids Research, 45(D1):D877–
D887, 11 2016.
[80] John G Tate, Sally Bamford, Harry C Jubb, Zbyslaw Sondka,
David M Beare, Nidhi Bindal, Harry Boutselakis, Charlotte G
Cole, Celestino Creatore, Elisabeth Dawson, Peter Fish, Bhavana
Harsha, Charlie Hathaway, Steve C Jupe, Chai Yin Kok, Kate
Survey for disease gene prediction 13
Noble, Laura Ponting, Christopher C Ramshaw, Claire E Rye,
Helen E Speedy, Ray Stefancsik, Sam L Thompson, Shicai Wang,
Sari Ward, Peter J Campbell, and Simon A Forbes. COSMIC:
the Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer. Nucleic Acids
Research, 47(D1):D941–D947, 10 2018.
[81] Alba GutiErrez-Sacristan, Solene Grosdidier, Olga Valverde,
Marta Torrens, Alex Bravo, Janet Pinero, Ferran Sanz, and
Laura I. Furlong. PsyGeNET: a knowledge platform on psychiatric
disorders and their genes. Bioinformatics, 31(18):3075–3077, 05
2015.
[82] Allan Peter Davis, Cynthia J Grondin, Robin J Johnson, Daniela
Sciaky, Roy McMorran, Jolene Wiegers, Thomas C Wiegers, and
Carolyn J Mattingly. The Comparative Toxicogenomics Database:
update 2019. Nucleic Acids Research, 47(D1):D948–D954, 09
2018.
[83] Tao-yang Fu, Wang-Chien Lee, and Zhen Lei. HIN2Vec:
Explore meta-paths in heterogeneous information networks for
representation learning. In CIKM, pages 1797–1806. ACM, 2017.
[84] Binbin Hu, Yuan Fang, and Chuan Shi. Adversarial learning on
heterogeneous information networks. In KDD, pages 120–129,
2019.
[85] Meng Qu, Jian Tang, Jingbo Shang, Xiang Ren, Ming Zhang, and
Jiawei Han. An attention-based collaboration framework for multi-
view network representation learning. In CIKM, pages 1767–1776.
ACM, 2017.
[86] Yu Shi, Fangqiu Han, Xinwei He, Xinran He, Carl Yang, Jie Luo,
and Jiawei Han. mvn2vec: Preservation and collaboration in multi-
view network embedding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.06597, 2018.
[87] Jingchao Ni, Shiyu Chang, Xiao Liu, Wei Cheng, Haifeng
Chen, Dongkuan Xu, and Xiang Zhang. Co-regularized deep
multi-network embedding. In WWW, pages 469–478, 2018.
[88] Sezin Kircali Ata, Yuan Fang, Min Wu, Jiaqi Shi, Chee Keong
Kwoh, and Xiaoli Li. Multi-view collaborative network
embedding, 2020.
[89] Marc A. van Driel, Jorn Bruggeman, Gert Vriend, Han G. Brunner,
and Jack A. M. Leunissen. A text-mining analysis of the human
phenome. Eur J Hum Genet, 14(5):535–542, 2006.
[90] Nitesh V Chawla, Kevin W Bowyer, Lawrence O Hall, and
W Philip Kegelmeyer. Smote: synthetic minority over-sampling
technique. JAIR, 16:321–357, 2002.
[91] Swaminathan Gurumurthy, Ravi Kiran Sarvadevabhatla, and
R Venkatesh Babu. Deligan: Generative adversarial networks for
diverse and limited data. In CVPR, pages 166–174, 2017.
[92] Maayan Frid-Adar, Idit Diamant, Eyal Klang, Michal Amitai,
Jacob Goldberger, and Hayit Greenspan. Gan-based synthetic
medical image augmentation for increased cnn performance in liver
lesion classification. Neurocomputing, 321:321–331, 2018.
[93] Yuki Saito, Shinnosuke Takamichi, and Hiroshi Saruwatari.
Statistical parametric speech synthesis incorporating generative
adversarial networks. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech,
and Language Processing, 26(1):84–96, 2017.
[94] Ming Hou, Brahim Chaib-Draa, Chao Li, and Qibin Zhao.
Generative adversarial positive-unlabeled learning. In IJCAI, pages
2255–2261, 2018.
[95] Sankha Subhra Mullick, Shounak Datta, and Swagatam Das.
Generative adversarial minority oversampling. In ICCV, pages
1695–1704, 2019.
[96] Petar Velickovic, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana
Romero, Pietro Lio, and Yoshua Bengio. Graph attention networks.
In ICLR, 2018.
[97] Qitian Wu, Hengrui Zhang, Xiaofeng Gao, Peng He, Paul Weng,
Han Gao, and Guihai Chen. Dual graph attention networks for deep
latent representation of multifaceted social effects in recommender
systems. In The World Wide Web Conference, pages 2091–2102,
2019.
[98] Xiang Wang, Xiangnan He, Yixin Cao, Meng Liu, and Tat-
Seng Chua. Kgat: Knowledge graph attention network for
recommendation. In KDD, pages 950–958, 2019.
[99] Masashi Tsubaki, Kentaro Tomii, and Jun Sese. Compound-protein
interaction prediction with end-to-end learning of neural networks
for graphs and sequences. Bioinformatics, 35(2):309–318, 07
2018.
[100] Yifeng Li, Fang-Xiang Wu, and Alioune Ngom. A review
on machine learning principles for multi-view biological data
integration. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 19(2):325–340, 2018.
[101] Zichao Yang, Diyi Yang, Chris Dyer, Xiaodong He, Alex Smola,
and Eduard Hovy. Hierarchical attention networks for document
classification. In NAACL-HLT, pages 1480–1489, 2016.
[102] P. Luo, L. Tian, J. Ruan, and F. Wu. Disease gene prediction
by integrating ppi networks, clinical rna-seq data and omim
data. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and
Bioinformatics, 16(1):222–232, 2019.
[103] Ye Yuan and Ziv Bar-Joseph. Deep learning for inferring gene
relationships from single-cell expression data. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 116(52):27151–27158, 2019.
[104] Giovanni Iacono, Ramon Massoni-Badosa, and Holger Heyn.
Single-cell transcriptomics unveils gene regulatory network
plasticity. Genome biology, 20(1):110, 2019.
[105] Cole Trapnell. Defining cell types and states with single-cell
genomics. Genome Research, 25(10):1491–1498, 2015.
[106] Vincent D Blondel, Jean-Loup Guillaume, Renaud Lambiotte,
and Etienne Lefebvre. Fast unfolding of communities in
large networks. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and
Experiment, 2008(10):P10008, oct 2008.
[107] V. A. Traag, L. Waltman, and N. J. van Eck. From louvain
to leiden: guaranteeing well-connected communities. Scientific
Reports, 9(1):5233, Mar 2019.
[108] Xiangyu Li, Weizheng Chen, Yang Chen, Xuegong Zhang, Jin Gu,
and Michael Q. Zhang. Network embedding-based representation
learning for single cell RNA-seq data. Nucleic Acids Research,
45(19):e166–e166, 08 2017.
[109] Hongwei Wang, Fuzheng Zhang, Mengdi Zhang, Jure Leskovec,
Miao Zhao, Wenjie Li, and Zhongyuan Wang. Knowledge-aware
graph neural networks with label smoothness regularization for
recommender systems. In KDD, pages 968–977, 2019.
[110] Xuan Lin, Zhe Quan, Zhi-Jie Wang, Tengfei Ma, and Xiangxiang
Zeng. Kgnn: Knowledge graph neural network for drug-drug
interaction prediction. In IJCAI, pages 2739–2745, 2020.